no — longing for Odysseus melts the heart in me.

They press the marriage on;

and I wind out my skein of tricks.

First it was the robe:

a god breathed it into my heart —
to set up a great loom in the halls and weave at it,
fine-threaded, beyond all measure wide;

and I told them straightway:

'Young men, my suitors — since noble Odysseus is dead,
wait, though you burn for my wedding, till I finish
this cloth — let my spinning not be wasted on the wind —
a shroud for the hero Laertes, against the day
the ruinous doom of death that lays men low will take him:

let no Achaean woman in the land hold it against me
that a man who won so much should lie without his winding-sheet.'
So I spoke, and their proud hearts were persuaded.

Then every day I wove at the great loom,
and every night I unwove it by torchlight.

Three years my trick escaped them, and I kept the Achaeans persuaded;

but when the fourth year came, as the seasons rolled on,
the months waning away, the long tale of days accomplished,
then — through my slave-women, those careless bitches —
they came on me and caught me, and shouted me down.

So I finished it — against my will, under force.

And now I can neither escape the marriage nor find
any other design.

My parents urge me hard
to marry;

and my son chafes as these men eat his living —
he understands now:

he is a man by now, fully able
to care for a house that Zeus grants glory to.

But even so, tell me your stock, where you are from:

you were not born of the oak in the old tales, nor of a stone."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered her:

"Honored wife of Laertes' son Odysseus,
will you not leave off asking me my lineage?

Well — I will tell you.

Though truly you hand me over to sorrows
more than hold me now:

that is the way of it, when a man
has been gone from his country as long as I have,
wandering through many cities of men, suffering pains.

Even so, I will tell you what you ask and probe for.

There is a land called Crete, out in the wine-dark sea,
beautiful and rich, ringed by the water;

and in it are people
past counting, and ninety cities:

tongue mixed with tongue — Achaeans there,
great-hearted native Cretans, Cydonians,
Dorians in their three clans, and noble Pelasgians;

and among the cities is Cnossus, the great town, where Minos
was king by nine-year terms, great Zeus's intimate —
the father of my father, great-hearted Deucalion.

Deucalion fathered me, and lord Idomeneus;

but Idomeneus had gone in the beaked ships
to Ilium with the sons of Atreus.

My famous name is Aethon —
the younger brother by birth;

he was elder, and the better man.

There I saw Odysseus, and gave him guest-gifts:

for the strength of the wind had brought him down on Crete
as he made for Troy, driving him off course past Malea.

He anchored at Amnisus, by the cave of Eileithyia,
in that difficult harbor, and barely rode out the squalls.

He came straight up to the town, asking for Idomeneus:

his guest-friend, he said, beloved and honored.

But it was now the tenth dawn for Idomeneus, or the eleventh,
since he had gone with the beaked ships to Ilium.

So I brought him to the house and gave him welcome,
warm and openhanded — the house had plenty in it —
and for the rest, for the companions who followed with him,
I gathered barley-meal from the public store, and sparkling wine,
and oxen for sacrifice, till their hearts were satisfied.

Twelve days the noble Achaeans stayed with me,
pinned there:

the great North Wind held them, and would not let them
stand even on shore — some hard god had raised it.

On the thirteenth the wind dropped, and they put out to sea."
He made the many lies he told seem like the truth.