"Son-in-law and daughter, give him the name I say.

Since I have come to this place at odds with many —
with men and with women across the nourishing earth —
let Odysseus, Man at Odds, be the name he carries.

And for my part:

when he is grown, and comes to Parnassus,
to his mother's great house, where my possessions are,
I will give him a share and send him home rejoicing."
For those gifts Odysseus went:

to receive his shining presents.

And Autolycus and the sons of Autolycus
clasped his hands in welcome, and greeted him with honeyed words;

and Amphithea, his mother's mother, folding Odysseus in her arms,
kissed his head, and both his beautiful eyes.

Then Autolycus called to his glorious sons
to make the meal ready;

and they heard his urging:

at once they led in a bull of five years,
flayed it and dressed it, and split the whole in pieces,
and jointed the meat with skill, and fixed it on the spits,
and roasted it with care, and shared out all the portions.

So then, the whole day long until the setting of the sun,
they feasted;

and no man's appetite went short of the equal feast.

And when the sun went down and the dusk came on,
they lay down then, and took the gift of sleep.

When Dawn appeared, the early-born, with fingers of rose,
they went their way to the hunt — the hounds and with them
the sons of Autolycus themselves;

and noble Odysseus
went along with them.

They climbed the steep mountain, mantled
in forest — Parnassus — and soon they reached its windy folds.

The sun was just striking the plowlands, rising
out of the deep smooth stream of Ocean,
when the beaters came to a glen;

ahead of them
ran the hounds, casting for the scent, and behind them
came the sons of Autolycus;

and noble Odysseus
moved close behind the hounds, swinging his long-shadowed spear.

There, in a dense thicket, lay couched a great boar.

No force of wet-blowing winds could pierce that covert,
no shaft of the shining sun could strike into it,
no rain drive through it, so dense it was,
and the fallen leaves lay heaped in it past counting.

Around the boar came the din of feet — men's and hounds' —
as they pressed in on him;

and out of his lair, head-on,
bristles ridged on his neck, fire standing in his eyes,
he stood at bay, close in.

And first of all Odysseus
rushed him, the long spear high in his heavy hand,
hungry to strike;

but the boar was quicker — gashed him
above the knee, charging in slantwise, and ripped away
a long gouge of flesh with his tusk:

but it did not reach the bone.

And Odysseus struck home on the right shoulder,
and the point of the shining spear went through and through:

down in the dust he went, bleating, and the life flew out of him.

Then the dear sons of Autolycus busied themselves with the carcass,
and the wound of blameless, godlike Odysseus
they bound with skill, and with a chanted spell they stanched
the black blood;

and quickly they came to their father's house.

And Autolycus and the sons of Autolycus
healed him well, and gave him shining gifts,
and quickly sent him back rejoicing to his own dear country,
to Ithaca.

And his father and his honored mother
rejoiced at his homecoming, and questioned him on everything —
the scar, and what had happened;

and he told them all of it well:

how the boar's white tusk had gashed him at the hunt
on his climb up Parnassus with the sons of Autolycus.

That scar — as the old woman took his leg in the flat of her hands
she knew it under her fingers.

She let the foot drop:

the shin fell in the basin;

the bronze rang out;

the basin tipped over sideways, and the water ran on the ground.

And joy and anguish seized her mind at once:

her eyes
filled up with tears;

her welling voice stuck fast.

She touched Odysseus on the chin, and said: