And as she listened her tears ran, and her flesh melted —
as snow melts away on the high crests of the mountains,
snow the West Wind piled and the East Wind thaws,
and as it melts the rivers run full with it:

so her beautiful cheeks melted with falling tears,
as she wept for her own husband — sitting at her side.

And Odysseus
pitied his wife in his heart as she grieved,
but his eyes stood fixed as horn or iron,
unwavering in their lids:

with craft he hid his tears.

And when she had taken her fill of tear-heavy mourning,
she found words again, and answered him:

"Now, stranger, I think I shall put you to the test:

whether you truly hosted my husband there in your halls
with his godlike companions, as you say.

Tell me what kind of clothes he wore on his body,
and what kind of man he was, and the companions who followed him."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered her:

"Lady, that is hard — for one so long apart
to say.

It is the twentieth year already
since he went from there and left my country behind.

Even so I will tell you how my heart's eye pictures him.

Noble Odysseus wore a woolen mantle of sea-purple,
a double fold;

and the brooch on it was fashioned of gold,
with paired sheaths for the pins;

the face of it was a marvel:

a hound held a dappled fawn between its forepaws,
gripping it as it writhed.

And everyone wondered at them —
both of gold:

the one gripping the fawn and throttling it,
the fawn straining with its feet to escape, even as it struggled.

And I noticed the tunic on his body, all a-shimmer,
like the skin that slips from a dried onion:

that soft it was, and bright as the sun itself.

Many the women, I tell you, who gazed at him in wonder.

And another thing I will tell you:

lay it up in your heart.

I do not know whether Odysseus wore these things from home,
or some companion gave them to him boarding the fast ship,
or perhaps some guest-friend, since to many men Odysseus
was dear:

few of the Achaeans were his equals.

I too gave him things:

a sword of bronze, a folded mantle,
fine, sea-purple, and a fringed tunic,
and sent him off with honor on his well-benched ship.

Also a herald attended him, a little older
than he was;

and I will tell you what he looked like too:

round in the shoulders, dark-skinned, curly-headed,
Eurybates his name;

and Odysseus prized him above
his other companions, for their minds ran matched.

So he spoke;

and he stirred in her still more the longing for weeping,
as she recognized the tokens Odysseus described so surely.

And when she had taken her fill of tear-heavy mourning,
then she found words again, and said to him:

"Now, stranger, pitiable as you were to me before,
in my halls you shall be dear and honored.

It was I who gave him those clothes — I, the very clothes you speak of —
folded from the storeroom, and I pinned on the shining brooch
to be his jewel.

And I shall never welcome him again
come home to his own dear fatherland.

By an evil fate Odysseus went in the hollow ship
to look on Evil-Ilium, never to be named."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered her:

"Honored wife of Laertes' son Odysseus,
mar your lovely skin no more, and melt your heart
no more away, weeping for your husband.

Not that I blame you at all:

any woman mourns the husband she has lost,
the man of her youth, whose children she bore in love —
even a lesser man than Odysseus, whom they call the equal of the gods.

But cease from weeping, and attend to my word:

for I will speak the exact truth and hide nothing:

I have already heard of Odysseus' homecoming —
near, in the rich land of the Thesprotian men,
alive;

and he is bringing many fine treasures home,
begging his way through the country.