But noble Odysseus stayed behind in the hall,
plotting the suitors' slaughter with Athena's help.

At once he spoke winged words to Telemachus:

"Telemachus, the weapons of war must be laid away inside —
all of them;

and the suitors — when they miss them and question you —
talk them around with soft words:

'I laid them out of the smoke:

they no longer looked like the arms
Odysseus left behind when he went to Troy —
they are fouled over, as far as the breath of the fire reached.

And a greater fear — this too a god has cast into my heart:

that in your wine you might raise a quarrel among you
and wound one another, and shame the feast
and the wooing.

For iron of itself draws a man on.'"
So he spoke;

and Telemachus obeyed his dear father,
and calling out the nurse Eurycleia he said:

"Nurse, come — shut the women in their quarters for me
until I have stowed away in the storeroom my father's
beautiful arms, which the smoke dulls, uncared for, all about
the house, since my father went away.

I was still a child then.

Now I want to lay them where the breath of the fire will not reach."
Then the dear nurse Eurycleia answered him:

"Yes, child — and if only you would take up the good sense at last
to care for the house and guard all its possessions!

But come — who then will fetch a light and carry it for you,
if the slave-women, who would have lit you, may not come out?"
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered her:

"This stranger here.

I will keep no man idle who takes
from my grain-measure, however far he has come."
So he spoke;

and for her the word stayed wingless.

And she locked the doors of the well-settled halls.

Then the two sprang up, Odysseus and his shining son,
and carried in the helmets and the bossed shields
and the sharp-pointed spears;

and before them Pallas Athena,
holding a golden lamp, made a light most beautiful.

And suddenly Telemachus said to his father:

"Father — here is a great wonder my eyes look on!

The walls of the hall — no question — and the fine crossbeams,
the fir rafters, and the pillars rising high
shine in my eyes as if from a blazing fire.

Surely some god is in the house, one of those who hold wide heaven."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered him:

"Quiet.

Rein in your thought.

Ask no questions.

This is the way of the gods who hold Olympus.

Go you to bed.

I will remain behind here
to stir the slave-women a little more, and your mother:

in her grief she will ask me about every particular."
So he spoke;

and Telemachus went out through the hall
to his chamber, under the blazing torches, to lie down
where he always slept when sweet sleep came to him.

There he lay down now too, and waited for shining Dawn.

But noble Odysseus stayed behind in the hall,
plotting the suitors' slaughter with Athena's help.

And out of her chamber came watchful-minded Penelope,
like Artemis, or golden Aphrodite.

They set her chair, where she always sat, beside the fire —
a chair wound round with ivory and silver, which the craftsman
Icmalius once made, and fixed beneath it a footrest
all of a piece with it, where a great fleece would be thrown.

There she sat down now, watchful-minded Penelope.

And the white-armed slave-women came in from the hall
and cleared away the piles of bread, and the tables,
and the cups from which the overbearing men had drunk;

they raked the fire from the braziers to the floor and stacked
fresh wood upon them, for light and for warmth.

And Melantho went at Odysseus a second time:

"Stranger — are you going to plague us even now, all through the night,
prowling around the house, spying on the women?