And I wept — I wailed aloud, though it was a dream,
and around me gathered the fair-braided Achaean women,
as I grieved most pitiably because the eagle had killed my geese.

But back he came, and perched on the jut of the roof-beam,
and with a man's voice he checked my grieving:

'Take heart, daughter of far-famed Icarius:

this is no dream but a waking sight — a good one, and it shall be accomplished.

The geese are the suitors;

and I — I was the eagle-bird
before;

but now I have come back, and I am your husband,
and I will let loose an ugly doom on all the suitors.'
So he spoke;

and the honey-sweet sleep let me go;

and casting about, I saw the geese there in the halls
pecking their wheat beside the trough, just where they always were."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered her:

"Lady, there is no way to wrench this dream aside
to read it another way:

Odysseus himself, no other,
has shown you how he will end it:

destruction shows plain for the suitors —
for every man of them;

not one shall slip out of death and the fates."
Then watchful-minded Penelope answered him:

"Stranger, dreams are hopeless things, and their talk past sorting;

not everything in them is accomplished for mortals.

For two are the gates of strengthless dreams:

one pair is fashioned of horn, and one of ivory.

Those dreams that come through the gate of sawn ivory
cheat and beguile:

they carry words that come to nothing.

But those that come out through the gate of polished horn
accomplish true things, whenever a mortal sees them.

But my strange dream, I fear, did not come from there —
ah, welcome as that would be to me and to my child.

And another thing I will tell you:

lay it up in your heart.

Here now comes the dawn of the evil name, that will cut me
away from the house of Odysseus.

For now I will set the contest:

the axes he used to stand up in a row in his halls,
like the props of a ship on the stocks — twelve in all;

and standing far back he would shoot an arrow through them.

Now I will set this contest before the suitors:

whoever strings the bow most easily in his hands,
and shoots an arrow through all twelve axes —
him I will follow, forsaking this house,
this house of my marriage, this beautiful house, full of all
that sustains life.

I think I shall remember it even in my dreams."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered her:

"Honored wife of Laertes' son Odysseus,
do not put off this contest in your house one hour.

For Odysseus of the many designs will be here first —
before these men, handling and handling the polished bow,
can string the cord and shoot through the iron."
Then watchful-minded Penelope answered him:

"Stranger, if you were only willing to sit by me in the halls
and give me pleasure, sleep would never settle on my eyes.

But there is no way men can go sleepless forever:

the deathless ones have set a portion for each thing
mortals do on the grain-giving earth.

So I will go up now to my upper room
to lie on the bed that has become a bed of groaning for me,
forever stained with my tears, since the day Odysseus
went to look on Evil-Ilium, never to be named.

There I will lie;

and you lie down in this house —
spread something on the floor, or let them set you a bed."
So speaking she climbed to her shining upper room,
not alone:

her handmaids went up with her.

Climbing to her upper room with her serving-women,
she wept there for Odysseus, her dear husband, until
gray-eyed Athena cast sweet sleep upon her eyelids.

---