But his trusted companions
he lost, and the hollow ship, on the wine-dark sea,
on the way from the island of Thrinacia:

for Zeus and Helios
were set at odds with him — his companions killed the Sun's cattle.

They all perished in the surging sea;

but he rode the keel of the ship, and the wave threw him ashore
on the land of the Phaeacians, whose birth is next to the gods'.

They honored him from the heart like a god,
and gave him many things, and were themselves ready to bring him
home unharmed.

And Odysseus would have been here
long since;

but this seemed to his heart the more profitable way:

to travel wide and gather wealth — for beyond
all mortal men Odysseus knows the profitable turn:

no living man could rival him at that.

So Pheidon told me all of it, the king of the Thesprotians;

and he swore an oath to me, pouring the libation in his house,
that a ship was hauled down and a crew standing ready
to convey him home to his own dear fatherland.

But me he sent off first:

for a Thesprotian ship
happened to be sailing for Dulichium, rich in wheat.

And he showed me all the treasure Odysseus had gathered:

truly it would feed a man's line to the tenth generation,
such a store of the lord's goods lay there in his halls.

Odysseus, he said, was gone to Dodona, to hear
the will of Zeus out of the god's own high-crowned oak:

how he should come home to his own dear fatherland,
openly or in secret, after so long away.

So he is safe;

so he will come — and soon now,
very near:

not far from his friends and his fathers' land
will he be for long.

And still I will give you my oath on it.

Now Zeus be my witness first — highest and best of the gods —
and the hearth of blameless Odysseus, to which I have come:

all this shall be accomplished exactly as I say.

Within this very turning of the light Odysseus will be here:

between this month's waning and the rising of the next."
Then watchful-minded Penelope answered him:

"Ah, stranger, if only that word might be accomplished:

then you would quickly know my friendship, and gifts
in plenty from me — any man who met you would call you blessed.

But this is how my heart forebodes it, and how it will be:

Odysseus is not coming home;

and you will get no passage —
for there are no masters in this house
such as Odysseus was among men — if he ever was —
to welcome honored strangers, and to send them on.

But wash him, my handmaids, and lay out a bed:

bedstead and cloaks and shining blankets,
so he may come warm through to Dawn of the golden throne.

And in the early morning bathe him and rub him with oil,
so that here inside, at Telemachus' side, he may look to his dinner,
seated in the hall.

And the worse for any man of them
who galls him — heart-destroyer:

he will accomplish nothing
here ever again, rage at it as he bitterly may.

For how will you learn of me, stranger, whether I stand out
at all among women in mind and thoughtful counsel,
if all unwashed and badly dressed you sit at meat
in my halls?

Men are creatures of a short day.

The man who is hard himself, and knows hard thoughts,
on him all mortals call down pains to come
while he lives, and when he is dead they mock him, every one;

but the man who is blameless himself, and knows blameless thoughts —
his fame the guests he served carry wide
to all mankind, and many call him noble."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered her:

"Honored wife of Laertes' son Odysseus,
cloaks and shining blankets turned hateful to me
the day I first put the snowy mountains of Crete
behind me, going aboard the long-oared ship.

I will lie this night as I have lain through sleepless nights before:

many the nights I have spent on some rough bed,
waiting it out for shining fair-throned Dawn.

Nor do foot-washings bring my heart any pleasure: