Out the door, you wretch — and be glad of the meal you got —
or you'll go out quick enough with a torch-brand at your back!"
Then, glaring from under his brows, Odysseus of the many designs replied:

"Woman possessed — why go for me with a heart so angry?

Because I am dirty, because the clothes on my body are bad,
because I beg through the land?

Necessity is on me:

that is what beggars and wandering men are like.

I too once lived in a house among men,
a fortunate man in a wealthy one, and I often gave to a wanderer,
whoever he might be and whatever need he came in.

Slaves I had past counting, and everything in plenty
by which men live well and get the name of rich.

But Zeus the son of Cronos stripped it all — such, no doubt, was his will.

So look to yourself, woman:

take care you never lose
all that shine of yours, that sets you off among the slave-women —
in case your mistress turns on you in anger,
or Odysseus comes.

For a portion of hope is left.

And even if he is dead as you think, and past returning,
by Apollo's grace there is his son by now,
such a son — Telemachus.

Not one woman in these halls
escapes his eye at her mischief.

He is past that age."
So he spoke;

and watchful-minded Penelope heard him,
and rounded on the handmaid, and spoke a word, and named her:

"Be sure of this, bold face, dog past all shame:

your grand
performance is not lost on me — you will wipe it off on your own head.

You knew — every part of it — you heard it from my own mouth:

that I meant to question the stranger in my halls
about my husband, for whom I grieve past telling."
Then she spoke to Eurynome the housekeeper:

"Eurynome, bring up a bench, and a fleece on it,
for the stranger to sit and speak his word and hear me
out:

I wish to question him through and through."
So she spoke;

and the woman bustled to bring the polished
bench and set it down, and threw a fleece upon it,
and there much-enduring noble Odysseus sat.

And watchful-minded Penelope began to speak among them:

"Stranger, this first will I myself ask you:

What man are you, and from where?

Where are your city and your parents?"
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered her:

"Lady, no mortal man on the boundless earth
could find a fault in you:

your fame goes up to the wide sky —
like the fame of some blameless king, a god-fearing man
ruling among many people and mighty,
upholding straight judgments;

and the black earth bears
wheat and barley under him, and the trees hang heavy with fruit,
the flocks throw firm young, the sea yields fish,
all from his good governing;

and under him the people flourish.

So — question me now on any other matter, here in your house,
but do not ask my race and my fathers' country,
or you will fill my heart still fuller with pains
as I remember:

I am a man of many sorrows.

And there is no need
to sit in a stranger's house grieving and lamenting —
grief without respite makes everything worse —
and one of the slave-women might take offense — or you yourself —
and say I swim in tears because the wine has weighed my wits."
Then watchful-minded Penelope answered him:

"Stranger, my excellence — my face, my figure —
the deathless ones destroyed the day the Argives
boarded ship for Ilium, and my husband Odysseus with them.

If he came back — if he watched over this life of mine —
my fame would be greater so, and lovelier.

Now I only grieve:

so many evils the god has driven at me.

All the great men who hold power among the islands —
Dulichium and Same and wooded Zacynthus —
and those whose homes are round clear-skied Ithaca itself:

they woo me against my will, and wear this house away.

So I pay no mind to strangers, none to suppliants,
none at all to heralds, the workers for the people;