'Cyclops — if any mortal man ever asks you
who put the shameful blinding on your eye,
tell him:

Odysseus, sacker of cities, blinded me —
the son of Laertes, who has his home in Ithaca.'
So I spoke, and he groaned aloud, and answered:

'Ah, then it comes home to me — the old prophecy!

There was a seer here once, a great man and a good one,
Telemus, Eurymus' son, who excelled in prophecy
and grew old prophesying among the Cyclopes.

He told me all this would come to pass in time:

that I would lose my sight at the hands of an Odysseus.

But I always watched for some big man, a handsome one,
to come here, clothed in great strength;

and now a little man, a worthless thing, a weakling,
has put out my eye — after he crushed me with wine.

But come here, Odysseus — let me set out a guest-gift for you,
and press the famous earth-shaker to give you passage home.

For I am his son, and he declares himself my father.

He himself, if he wills it, will heal me — and no one else,
none of the blessed gods, and no mortal man.'
So he spoke;

and I answered him and said:

'Would to god I could strip you of breath and life
and send you down to the house of Hades
as surely as not even the earth-shaker will ever heal that eye.'
So I spoke;

and he then prayed to the lord Poseidon,
stretching out his hands to the starry heaven:

'Hear me, Poseidon who hold the earth, dark-haired one:

if I am truly yours, and you declare yourself my father,
grant that Odysseus, sacker of cities, never come home —
the son of Laertes, who has his home in Ithaca.

But if it is his portion to see his own people, to reach
his well-built house and his own fatherland,
late may he come, and in evil case, all companions lost,
on another man's ship — and find trouble in his house.'
So he spoke in prayer, and the dark-haired god heard him.

Then once again he lifted a stone — far bigger —
whirled it, and let it fly, putting his measureless strength behind it,
and brought it down just astern of the dark-blue ship —
barely — it missed the tip of the steering-oar;

and the sea heaved up under the falling rock,
and the wave carried her forward, and drove her toward the far shore.

But when we came back to the island where the other
well-benched ships waited all together, with the companions
sitting round them weeping, watching for us without end,
there we ran the ship up on the sands
and stepped out ourselves onto the surf-line of the sea.

And taking the Cyclops' flocks out of the hollow ship
we divided all, so that no man might go cheated of his share by me.

But the great ram — my strong-greaved companions gave him
to me alone, when the flocks were shared, a gift apart;

and on the shore
I offered him to Zeus of the black cloud, the son of Cronos,
lord of all, and burned the thigh-cuts.

But he took no heed of my offering:

he was pondering, even then, how all my well-benched ships
might be destroyed, and all my trusted companions.

So then all day long till the setting of the sun
we sat feasting on meat past counting and sweet wine;

and when the sun went down and the dusk came on,
then we lay down to sleep on the surf-line of the sea.

When Dawn appeared, the early-born, with fingers of rose,
then I roused my companions and ordered them
to board in their turn and loose the stern-cables.

And they came aboard at once and took their places at the oarlocks,
and sitting in order they struck the gray salt water with their oars.

From there we sailed on further, grieved at heart,
glad to be out of death, having lost our dear companions.

---