When Dawn appeared, the early-born, with fingers of rose,
we walked that island marveling, all through it.
And the nymphs, daughters of aegis-bearing Zeus, started
the mountain goats, so my companions might have their meal.
At once we fetched our curved bows and long-socketed goat-spears
out of the ships, and forming in three bands
we shot; and quickly the god gave us game to our hearts' content.
Twelve ships followed with me, and to each
nine goats fell by lot; for me alone they picked out ten.
So then all day long till the setting of the sun
we sat feasting on meat past counting and sweet wine.
For the red wine was not yet spent from out our ships:
there was still some left, for each crew had drawn off much
in two-handled jars when we took the Cicones' holy citadel.
And we looked across at the land of the Cyclopes, who were near:
smoke, and voices — theirs, and their sheep's and goats'.
And when the sun went down and the dusk came on,
then we lay down to sleep on the surf-line of the sea.
When Dawn appeared, the early-born, with fingers of rose,
then I called an assembly, and spoke among them all:
'The rest of you stay here now, my trusted companions,
while I with my own ship and my own crew
go and make trial of those men over there — what they are:
whether violent, savage, without justice,
or kind to strangers, with hearts that fear the gods.'
So speaking I went aboard, and ordered my companions
to board in their turn and loose the stern-cables.
And they came aboard at once and took their places at the oarlocks,
and sitting in order they struck the gray salt water with their oars.
But when we reached the place — it was not far —
there on the land's edge, close by the sea, we saw a cave,
high, overhung with laurels. There many
flocks — sheep and goats — were penned at night; around it a yard
ran high-built, of stones set deep in the earth,
and tall pines, and oaks with lofty crowns.
And there a man slept, a monster of a man, who shepherded
his flocks alone and far apart; he kept no company
with others, but held aloof, and his heart knew no law.
For he was built a monstrous wonder — nothing like
a man who eats bread, but like a wooded crag
of the high mountains, standing clear of all the rest.

Then I ordered the rest of my trusted companions
to stay there by the ship and guard the ship,
while I picked the twelve best of my companions
and went. And I took a goatskin of dark wine,
sweet wine, that Maron gave me, Euanthes' son,
the priest of Apollo, the god who watches over Ismarus —
because we had protected him, with his child and his wife,
out of reverence: for he lived in the wooded grove
of Phoebus Apollo. And he gave me shining gifts:
he gave me seven talents of well-wrought gold,
and he gave me a mixing-bowl all of silver, and then
wine, drawn off in two-handled jars, twelve in all,
sweet and unmixed, a drink for gods. Not one
of the slaves or handmaids in his house knew of it —
only himself and his dear wife, and one housekeeper only.
Whenever they drank that honey-sweet red wine,
he would fill one cup and pour it into twenty measures
of water, and a sweet smell would rise from the bowl,
a marvel: no joy then in holding back.
Of this I filled a great skin and brought it, and provisions too
in a sack: for my proud heart had a foreboding, even then,
that a man would come against me clothed in great strength,
a savage, knowing nothing of judgments or of laws.