When Dawn appeared, the early-born, with fingers of rose,
then he lit the fire, and milked his famous flocks,
all in due order, and set the young under each.

And when at last he had hurried through his work,
he snatched up two men together again, and made his meal ready.

And having fed, he drove his fat flocks out of the cave,
lifting off the great door-stone with ease — and then
set it back, the way a man sets the lid on a quiver.

With a great whistling the Cyclops turned his fat flocks
toward the mountain;

and I was left brooding evil deep in my heart:

if somehow I might pay him back, and Athena grant me the glory.

And this, as I turned it over, seemed to me the best plan.

There lay beside a pen a great club of the Cyclops',
green olive-wood:

he had cut it to carry
once it seasoned.

Looking it over we judged it
big as the mast of a black twenty-oared ship,
a broad-beamed freighter, that crosses the great gulf:

that was its length, that its thickness to the eye.

Standing to it, I cut off about a fathom's measure
and handed it to my companions, and told them to dress it down;

and they made it smooth, while standing by I brought it to a point
at the tip, and then took it and hardened it in the blazing fire.

And I laid it carefully by, hiding it under the dung
that was strewn in a great deep litter through the cave.

And I told the others to shake lots among them
for who would dare, together with me, to lift the stake
and grind it in his eye, when sweet sleep came on him.

The lot fell on the very men I would have chosen —
four of them, and I counted myself in with them, the fifth.

At evening he came back, herding his fair-fleeced flocks,
and drove those fat flocks straight into the wide cavern,
all of them:

he left not one outside in the deep yard,
whether some foreboding moved him, or a god so ordered it.

Then he lifted high and set in place the great door-stone,
and sitting, he milked the ewes and bleating goats,
all in due order, and set the young under each.

And when at last he had hurried through his work,
he snatched up two men together again, and made his supper ready.

And then I came up close and spoke to the Cyclops,
holding in my hands an ivy-wood bowl of the dark wine:

'Cyclops — here, drink wine, now you have fed on man-flesh:

so you may know what kind of drink our ship
carried stored.

I was bringing it as an offering for you, in hope
you might pity me and send me home.

But your madness is past all bearing.

Merciless one — how will any other man of all the many
ever come near you again?

What you have done is past all measure.'
So I spoke;

and he took it, and drank it down;

and it pleased him — terribly —
the sweet drink;

and he demanded a second helping:

'Give me more — be generous.

And tell me your name,
here, now, so I can give you a guest-gift that will make you glad.

The grain-giving plowland bears wine for the Cyclopes too —
fine clusters, and Zeus' rain swells them for us;

but this — this is a rivulet of ambrosia and nectar!'
So he spoke, and I handed him the fire-bright wine again.

Three times I brought and gave it;

three times, in his folly, he drained it.

And when the wine had come circling round the Cyclops' wits,
then I spoke to him with honeyed words:

'Cyclops, you ask my glorious name?

Then I
will tell it — and you give me the guest-gift, as you promised.

Nobody is my name.

Nobody is what they call me —
my mother and my father and all my companions.'
So I spoke, and he answered me at once, with pitiless heart:

'Nobody I will eat last of all his company,
and the others before him.

That shall be your guest-gift.'
He spoke — and reeling back he fell flat, and lay there
with his thick neck lolled over sideways;

and sleep
the all-subduer took him.