And from his gullet gushed wine
and gobbets of human flesh, as he belched in his drunkenness.

And then I drove the stake under the deep ash-heap
to heat;

and with my words I put courage in all
my companions, so no man might flinch and hang back.

But when that olive stake in the fire, green though it was,
was on the point of catching, and glowed clean through, terrible —
then I brought it close out of the fire, and my companions
stood round me;

and a great power breathed courage into us.

They took up the olive stake, sharpened at its point,
and rammed it in his eye;

and I, throwing my weight on from above,
spun it — the way a man bores a ship-timber
with a drill, and his mates below keep it running
with a strap they hold at either end, and it spins on without stopping:

so we took the fire-pointed stake and spun it
in his eye, and the blood came boiling up round its heat,
and the blast singed all his lids and brows away
as the eyeball burned, and the roots of it crackled in the fire.

As when a smith dips a great axe-head or an adze
in cold water, and it hisses loud and high,
tempering it — for that is what gives iron its strength —
so his eye hissed round the olive stake.

And he let out a huge and hideous howl, and the rock rang round it,
and we shrank back in terror.

He wrenched the stake
out of his eye, all fouled with streaming blood,
and flung it from him, flailing his arms in agony,
and set up a great bellowing to the Cyclopes who lived
around him in caves along the windy heights.

And they heard his cry and came thronging from every side,
and standing round the cave they asked him what was wrong:

'What in the world, Polyphemus?

What hurt, that you cry out so
through the ambrosial night and make us sleepless?

Surely no mortal is driving off your flocks against your will?

Surely no one is killing you — by cunning or by force?'
And out of the cave strong Polyphemus answered them:

'Friends — Nobody is killing me, by cunning and not by force!'
And they answered with winged words, and gave it back:

'If nobody is forcing you, then — alone as you are —
it must be sickness from great Zeus, and there is no escaping that.

Pray to our father, the lord Poseidon.'
So they spoke as they went;

and my own heart laughed,
how my name had utterly deceived him — the name, and the flawless cunning.

But the Cyclops, groaning and heaving in his agonies,
groped with his hands and lifted the stone from the doorway,
and sat himself down in the door with both arms spread,
in hope of catching anyone who tried to slip out with the sheep:

such a fool, I suppose, he hoped to find in me.

But I was planning how it might all come out best —
if I could find some release from death for my companions
and for myself;

and I wove every guile and design,
as a man does for his very life:

for the great evil was close.

And this, as I turned it over, seemed to me the best plan.

There were rams there, well-fed, thick in the fleece,
fine big animals, their wool dark as violets.

These, working quietly, I lashed together with plaited withies —
the ones that monster slept on, the outlaw — in threes:

the middle one of each three carried a man,
and the other two walked either side, protecting my companions.

So three sheep to each man.

But for myself —
there was one ram, far the finest of all the flock;

I caught him along the back and curled under his shaggy belly
and lay there;

and in that wondrous fleece, with my hands
twisted fast, I hung on, with an enduring heart.

So then, groaning, we waited for shining Dawn.