When Dawn appeared, the early-born, with fingers of rose,
then the male flocks poured out toward pasture,
and the unmilked females bleated about the pens
with their udders bursting.

And their lord, worn down
by evil agonies, ran his hands along the backs of all his sheep
as they stood up straight — and never sensed it, the fool:

my men bound under the breasts of his own fleecy sheep.

Last of the flock the great ram walked toward the doorway,
heavy with his wool — and with me, and my crowding thoughts.

And strong Polyphemus, running his hands over him, said:

'Old sweetheart — my ram — why last of all the flock
through the cave this time?

Before, you were never one to lag behind:

first, always first, striding out to graze the soft flowering grass,
first to reach the running rivers,
first in your longing to turn home to the fold
at evening.

And now — last of all.

Grieving, are you,
for your master's eye, that a coward of a man put out,
with his miserable companions, when he had crushed my wits with wine —
Nobody — who is not yet, I promise, clear of destruction.

If only you could think with me, if only you had a voice
to say where that man is dodging from my fury:

then his brains would be dashed against the floor and spattered
this way and that through the cave, and my heart would find
some ease from the evils this worthless Nobody has brought me.'
So speaking he sent the ram away from him, out the door.

And when we had gone a little way from the cave and the yard,
first I loosed myself from under the ram, and then set my companions free.

Swiftly then we drove those long-shanked sheep, deep in fat,
turning again and again to look behind, until we came
to the ship.

And a welcome sight we were to our dear companions —
we who had escaped death — but the others they wept and wailed for.

I would not have it:

I frowned each man's tears back
and ordered them quickly to fling the fine-fleeced sheep
aboard in numbers, and sail out over the salt water.

And they came aboard at once and took their places at the oarlocks,
and sitting in order they struck the gray salt water with their oars.

But when I was as far offshore as a man's shout carries,
then I called to the Cyclops with jeering words:

'Cyclops!

Not so weak a man's companions, after all,
were those you meant to eat by main force in your hollow cave.

And your own evil deeds were bound to find you out —
merciless one — you who did not shrink from eating guests
in your own house.

For that Zeus has paid you, and the other gods.'
So I spoke, and the anger in his heart grew fiercer,
and he tore off the peak of a great mountain and hurled it,
and brought it down just ahead of the dark-blue prow —
barely — it missed the tip of the steering-oar;

and the sea heaved up under the falling rock,
and the backwash carried the ship straight in toward the land,
a flood-surge out of the deep, and drove her toward the shore.

But I seized a long pole in my hands
and shoved her off and out, and roused my companions,
ordering them to fall to their oars and get us clear of the evil,
nodding hard with my head;

and they bent to it and rowed.

But when we were twice as far out over the sea,
then I made to call to the Cyclops again;

and around me my companions
tried to hold me back with honeyed words, this one and that one:

'Merciless man — why must you provoke a savage
who even now, with that shot into the sea, has driven the ship
straight back ashore — and we thought we died there!

If he had heard a voice, heard any one of us speaking,
he would have smashed our heads and the ship's timbers together
with one jagged boulder:

he throws that far.'
So they spoke, but they could not persuade my great heart,
and I called back to him with fury in my breast: