and she seemed like a woman,
beautiful, tall, and skilled in the making of splendid hand-labors.

Then she addressed him and spoke out winged words in answer:

“He would be crafty indeed, and a thief beyond others, whoever
passed you in all your deceits, even if some god met you face to face there.

Reckless one, shifty-minded, insatiable schemer in falsehood,
not even here, in your own native land, were you likely to cease from
cheating tales and deceitful words, which are dear to you from the ground up.

But come, let us no longer speak of these things, for both of us know well
crafty advantage, since you are by far the best among mortals
in counsel and speech, while I among all the gods am distinguished
both for wisdom and cunning.

Yet even so you did not know
Pallas Athena, daughter of Zeus, who always is standing
by you in all of your labors and guarding and keeping you safely,
and who made you beloved among all of the Phaeacian people.

Now once more I have come here, that I may weave plans with you wisely,
and may hide away the possessions the noble Phaeacians
gave you when you were coming back home by my counsel and purpose,
and may tell you as well how many griefs it is fated
you must endure in your well-built halls;

and you must bear them by compulsion.

Tell no one of them, neither man nor woman, the story
that you have come here after wandering, but rather in silence
suffer your many pains, submitting yourself to the violence of men.”
Then resourceful Odysseus addressed her and answered her, saying:

“Difficult it is, goddess, for a mortal who meets you before him
to discern you, even though he is very knowing, for you take all likenesses.

Yet this I know full well, that in former times you were gentle
toward me, while we sons of the Achaeans kept warring in Troyland.

But after we sacked the steep-walled city of Priam,
and set out in our ships, and a god scattered the Achaean forces,
never again did I see you, daughter of Zeus, nor perceive you
boarding my ship so that you might ward some pain away from me.

No, but always with torn heart within my breast I kept wandering,
I kept on wandering, until the gods loosed me from my afflictions;

till on that day in the rich-settled land of the Phaeacian people
you gave me courage in speech and yourself led me to the city.

Now by your father I clasp your knees—for I do not imagine
that I have come to clear-seen Ithaca, no, but some other
land I am roaming in;

and I think you are only in mockery
saying these things, so that you may beguile and bewilder my spirit—
tell me if truly indeed I have reached my beloved home-country.”
Then in answer to him spoke the goddess gray-eyed Athena:

“Always this sort of a mind is there inside of your bosom;

therefore I cannot abandon you there in your pain and your sorrow,
since you are gentle and keen of wit and steady in judgment.

Any other man, coming home from his wanderings, would be eager
straightway within his halls to behold his children and consort;

but to you it is not yet dear to be told or be certain,
not till you make trial still of your wife, who in equal constancy
sits there within your halls, and for her in continual sorrow
nights and days waste away as she sheds her tears without ceasing.

Yet for my part I never at all was doubtful, but in my spirit
knew you would come home again, though bereft of all your companions;

but I was not willing to fight with Poseidon against you,
my father's brother, who stored up wrath in the depth of his spirit,
angered because you had blinded the eye of the son he beloved.

But come, I will show you the seat of Ithaca, that you may trust me.

This is the harbor of Phorcys, the old man lord of the seaward;

and here at the head of the harbor stands the long-leafed olive;