So he had spoken, and all of them then fell hushed into silence,
held by the spell through the halls in the depth of the shadowy megaron.

Then in his turn Alcinous answered him back and addressed him:

“Lord Odysseus, since you have come to my bronze-floored dwelling,
high-roofed hall, I do not think that after your roaming
you will be driven away from your homecoming, though you have suffered.

But to each man here among you I speak and enjoin you:

all who are always drinking in my halls the bright elder's
fiery wine, and listening there to the song of the singer:

Clothing already lies for the guest in the polished coffer,
and wrought gold, finely fashioned, and all the other gifts too,
all that the Phaeacian counselors brought and bestowed here.

Come then, let us also give him a great tripod and cauldron,
man by man;

and afterward we, by collecting among the people,
shall make repayment;

for hard it is for one man to give freely.”
So Alcinous spoke, and his saying gave pleasure to all of them.

Then they went away to sleep, each one to his own house.

But when Dawn early-born appeared with her rose-red fingers,
they hurried down to the ship, bearing the bronze that brings honor.

And the holy strength of Alcinous stowed it all rightly,
himself going through the ship under the thwarts, lest any object
hinder the crewmen at rowing whenever they strained at the oar-blades.

Then they went to Alcinous' house and made ready the banquet.

For them the holy strength of Alcinous slaughtered an ox there
for Zeus son of Cronos, the dark-cloud lord who rules all.

Then after burning the thigh-pieces, they feasted on splendid abundance,
taking delight;

and among them the godlike singer was chanting,
Demodocus, held in honor among the people.

But then Odysseus
often turned his head toward the sun in its blaze and brilliance,
eager that it might set;

for indeed he was yearning for homeward.

As when a man longs greatly for supper, one whose yoked oxen
all through the day have dragged the jointed plow through the fallow,
welcome indeed to him is the light of the sun when it sets there,
so he may go to his supper, though his knees grow weak in the going:

so to Odysseus welcome the light of the sun sank beneath him.

Straightway he spoke among the Phaeacians who love the oar-stroke,
and chiefly addressing Alcinous spoke forth his saying:

“Lord Alcinous, most illustrious among all peoples,
pour the libation and send me away unharmed;

and farewell, all.

For now all things have been brought to pass that my dear heart desired:

convoy and loving gifts;

may the gods of the sky in their favor
make them bring blessing;

and may I find my blameless wife in my home there,
come back again, with my dear ones safe and unharmed beside me.

And may you, staying here, give joy to your wedded wives there
and to your children;

and may the gods grant every excellence,
every good thing, and let no public evil come on your people.”
So he had spoken, and all gave assent and urged one another
to send the stranger away, since indeed he had spoken with justice.

Then to the herald the strength of Alcinous spoke and commanded:

“Pontonous, mix in the bowl and serve out the wine through the hall now
to all, so after prayer to father Zeus we may send off
this guest to the land of his fathers, his own native country.”
So he spoke, and Pontonous mixed the honey-sweet wine in the krater,
and served it to all in due order;

and they to the blessed gods
poured out libations, the gods who possess the wide heaven,
there from their seats.

But lordly Odysseus arose then,
and into Arete's hand he placed the double-handled goblet,
and speaking aloud he addressed her with winged words and saluted: