“Ah me, now truly the ancient prediction has reached and fulfilled me,
told by my father, who said that Poseidon would bear us resentment
because we convoy all men and send them unharmed on their journeys.

He said that someday a beautiful ship of Phaeacian sailors,
coming back from escort upon the mist-covered waters,
would be broken in pieces, and round our city a great hill be heaped up.

So the old man declared, and now all these things are accomplished.

Come then, let us all obey as I now shall instruct you:

cease from escorting mortal men whenever one reaches
here to our city;

and let us sacrifice bulls to Poseidon,
twelve that are chosen, in hope that perhaps he may pity
and not heap round our city the long overshadowing mountain.”
So he spoke, and they feared, and they made the bulls ready before him.

Thus they were praying then to Poseidon the lord and the ruler,
leaders and counselors there of the people of the Phaeacians,
standing around the altar.

But noble Odysseus awakened,
sleeping in his own fatherland, yet he did not know it,
having been long away;

for a goddess had poured all around him
mist, Pallas Athena, the daughter of Zeus, so that she might
make him unknown, and might tell him the whole of the matter,
lest his wife should know him before, and his townsmen and dear friends,
before the suitors had paid for the whole of their reckless transgression.

Therefore to him as their lord all things appeared in strange fashion:

the long-stretching paths and the havens that welcome all shipping,
and the sheer-rising rocks and the flourishing trees heavy-leafing.

Then he sprang to his feet and stood and beheld his fatherland,
and after that groaned aloud and smote on the thighs with his two hands,
striking them flatwise, and uttered a word of lament in his sorrow:

“Oh, to what mortals’ land have I come now once more in my roaming?

Are they overbearing and savage and knowing no justice,
or are they friendly to strangers, with minds that revere the gods’ order?

Where shall I carry this wealth?

And where shall I wander in person?

Would that I had remained there beside the Phaeacians themselves.

Then I might have approached some other exceedingly mighty
king, who would welcome me kindly and send me away to my homeland.

Now I do not know where to set these things down, nor indeed shall
I leave them here, lest somehow they become spoil for others.

Oh, for shame, then not wholly wise nor wholly just-hearted
were the leaders and counselors there of the people of Phaeacia,
who conveyed me away to another land, though they told me
they would bring me to bright-seen Ithaca, yet did not perform it.

May Zeus of suppliants repay them, who watches all mortals
and exacts retribution from any man whenever he sins there.

But come, let me count out these goods and look over them carefully,
lest as they went in the hollow ship they have taken some portion.”
So he spoke, and he counted the splendid tripods before him,
and the cauldrons, and gold, and the finely woven fair garments.

Of them nothing was lacking;

yet still he lamented his homeland,
crawling along by the shore of the loud-resounding sea water,
grieving at length;

and Athena came near him and stood by,
like in form to a young man, a shepherd and tender of sheepflocks,
delicate, such as the sons of kings in their youth are in beauty,
having around her shoulders a well-wrought cloak doubled over;

under her shining feet she had sandals, and held a light javelin.

Odysseus rejoiced when he saw her and went to confront her,
and calling aloud he addressed her with winged words in this manner:

“Friend, since you are the first one I have encountered in this region,
hail, and do not approach me with any intent that is harmful;