Then from the well-benched ship they stepped out onto the mainland,
and first from the hollow ship they lifted Odysseus,
with the linen sheet itself and the shining and bright coverlet on him,
and they set him down on the sand, overpowered still by slumber.

Then they lifted the goods that the splendid Phaeacian people
gave him to bear on his journey home, through great-hearted Athena.

These they then set all heaped by the base and trunk of the olive,
out of the road, lest one of the wayfaring race of men passing
should, before Odysseus awakened, come up and despoil them.

Then they themselves again started back for home.

Yet the Earth-Shaker
had not forgotten the threats that he uttered against godlike Odysseus
in the beginning, but asked what the purpose of Zeus might be.

“Father Zeus, no longer shall I be honored among the immortals,
if mortals now do not honor me, not even a little,
these Phaeacians, who after all are sprung from my own generation.

For indeed I had thought that Odysseus, after much suffering,
would come home;

yet I never wholly denied him his homecoming,
since you first had promised and nodded your head in assent there.

But now while he slept in the swift ship, bearing him over the waters,
they laid him down in Ithaca, and they gave him uncounted gifts too,
bronze and gold in abundance, and woven garments as well there,
many, so many as never from Troy would Odysseus have taken,
even if safe he had come with his due allotted share of the plunder.”
Then Zeus the gatherer of clouds in answer addressed him:

“Oh my, Earth-Shaker, wide-ruling lord, what a word you have spoken.

The gods are not dishonoring you;

and it would be a hard matter
to cast dishonor upon the eldest and best among all gods.

But if some man among mortals, relying on strength and on power,
does not honor you at all, why, vengeance is always before you.

Do as you please, whatever indeed is dear to your own spirit.”
Then Poseidon the Earth-Shaker answered him, saying:

“I would act on it straightway, dark-cloud lord, exactly as you say there;

yet I am always mindful of your own spirit and shrink from it.

Now then, I desire to smash that beautiful ship of the Phaeacians,
as she returns from her escort across the mist-covered seaway,
so that now at last they may stop and desist from convoying mortals;

and around their city I mean to cast a great mountain about them.”
Then Zeus the gatherer of clouds in answer addressed him:

“Dear one, this is the way that it seems to my own mind the best course:

when all the people are looking on from the city and watching
as she drives in, then make her a stone very near to the mainland,
like to a swift ship in form, so all human beings may wonder,
and around their city cast up a great mountain about them.”
So when Poseidon the Earth-Shaker had heard what was spoken,
off he went on his way to Scheria, where the Phaeacians were dwelling.

There he remained;

and the sea-faring ship came on very near him,
swiftly impelled;

and the Earth-Shaker came up close beside her,
who made her a stone and rooted her fast in the seabed
driving her down with the flat of his hand;

then he departed.

Then to each other they spoke out their winged words in wonder,
the Phaeacians, long-oared men renowned for the fame of their shipping.

Thus would a man speak out as he looked at the man close beside him:

“Oh, who has shackled our swift ship here on the open water,
driving for home?

And plainly before us her whole hull was showing.”
So would one speak;

but they did not know how this thing had happened.

Then Alcinous spoke in assembly and answered among them: