and close beside it a lovely cave wrapped over in dimness,
sacred to nymphs, the ones that are called by men the Naiads.

This is the arching cavern where many and many a great gift
you used to perform for the nymphs, full-finished hecatombs there;

and this is Neriton mountain, clothed all over with forest.”
So the goddess spoke, and scattered the mist, and the country appeared clear.

Then did the great-enduring noble Odysseus feel gladness,
rejoicing in his own land, and he kissed the grain-giving earth there.

Straightway he prayed to the nymphs, lifting his hands up before them:

“Naiad nymphs, daughters of Zeus, I had never expected
ever to see you again;

but now with gentle entreaties
hail, and we will give gifts, as we did in the time that is bygone,
if the daughter of Zeus, who drives the spoil, in her kindness will grant me
life for myself, and bring my beloved son on into manhood.”
Then to him once more spoke the goddess gray-eyed Athena:

“Take heart;

do not let these matters trouble your mind any longer.

Rather, let us at once in the inmost part of the wondrous
cave put away these possessions, so all may remain safe for you there;

then let us both take counsel how everything best may be managed.”
So the goddess spoke, and entered the cave wrapped over in dimness,
seeking the hiding-places throughout the cavern;

and then Odysseus
carried all inward close by, the gold and the tireless bronze there,
and the well-fashioned garments the Phaeacians had given him.

All these he carefully stored, and over the doorway a great stone
Pallas Athena set fast, the daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus.

Then the two of them sat by the foot of the sacred olive tree there
and were devising destruction for all the arrogant suitors.

First among them in speech began the goddess gray-eyed Athena:

“Son of Laertes, seed of Zeus, Odysseus of many devices,
plan how you shall lay hands on the shameless troop of the suitors,
who now for three full years have been lording it over your household,
courting your godlike wife and presenting the gifts of their wooing.

Yet she, with longing always in heart for your homeward returning,
gives hope to every man and promises each one in turn there,
sending messages forth, while the mind in her longs for another.”
Then in answer to her spoke Odysseus of many devices:

“Ah me, then surely I too like Agamemnon son of Atreus
should have met a disastrous doom in the midst of my halls and my household,
if you, goddess, had not recounted each thing in its due order.

Come then, weave me a stratagem, how I shall punish them for it;

and you yourself stand near me, and breathe bold force into my spirit,
as in the day when we loosed the shining frontlet of Troia.

If with such eagerness you would stand there beside me, gray-eyed one,
then with you I could fight against even three hundred fighters,
with you, revered goddess, if with ready heart you would aid me.”
Then in answer to him spoke the goddess gray-eyed Athena:

“Surely I will be beside you, and you will not fail to perceive me,
when the time comes that we must be busy about these endeavors;

and I think many a man of the suitors who raven your livelihood
will befoul the broad floor with blood and with brains all together.

But come, I will make you unknown to the sight of all mortals.

I will shrivel the beautiful flesh on the limbs of your supple body,
strip from your head the bright hair, and around you cast a poor garment
such that a man would abhor to behold it upon any wearer.

I will dim too your eyes that before were exceedingly lovely,
so that to all of the suitors you seem a thing of dishonor,
and to your wife and the son whom you left behind in your hall there.