You yourself first of all must go to the keeper of swine there,
he who attends on your pigs, yet in heart he is kindly toward you,
and he loves your son and prudent Penelope dearly.

You will find him seated beside the swine;

and they pasture
there by the Raven Rock and beside the spring Arethusa,
eating acorns in plenty to strengthen the heart within them,
drinking dark water, the things that make the swine grow fat richly.

There you must stay, and sitting beside him ask about all things,
till I myself go to Sparta, the land of beautiful women,
there to summon Telemachus, your own dear son, Odysseus,
who to wide-spaced Lacedaemon went, to the side of Menelaus,
seeking report of your fame, whether anywhere you still lived.”
Then resourceful Odysseus answered and spoke in return to her:

“Why then did you not tell him, you who know all in your spirit?

Was it so he as well might wander and suffer afflictions
over the fruitless sea, while others devour his substance?”
Then in reply to him spoke the goddess gray-eyed Athena:

“Do not let concern for him lie too heavily on your spirit.

I myself was his escort, that there he might gather good glory
after his coming;

he suffers no pain, but calmly and safely
sits in the house of the son of Atreus, with countless things by him.

True, the young men lie in wait for him there with a black ship,
eager to kill him before he reaches the land of his fathers.

Yet I do not think this will be;

before that, the earth will enfold some
suitor men, more than one, who are eating away your substance.”
So then having spoken, Athena touched him there with her wand.

She shriveled the beautiful skin on the limbs of his supple body,
from his head she destroyed the fair hair, and around him a hide she
set on every limb like the skin of a worn and elderly old man.

She dimmed too the eyes that before had been exceedingly lovely,
and around him she cast another vile rag and a tunic,
tattered and foul with grime, all befouled by evil black smoke-stain.

Over him too she put the great hide of a swift-running deer there,
rubbed bare;

and she gave him a staff and a pitiful beggar’s pouch too,
full of many rents, and the strap on it twisted with cordage.

So when the two had laid their design, they parted from each other;

then she went to glorious Lacedaemon after his son there.