Then he pondered this way and that in his mind and his great heart,
whether to kiss his father and clasp him close in his arms there,
and to tell him all, how he had come and reached his own country,
or to inquire into all and test him in every particular.

As he turned it in mind, this course appeared to him better:

first with words of mocking edge to make full trial and test him.

Thinking on this, noble Odysseus went straight up before him.

There he was, head bowed down, digging around a young tree-root;

standing close beside him, his glorious son then addressed him:

“Old sir, no want of skill is on you in tending an orchard;

truly your care is good;

there is nothing at all here neglected,
neither a plant nor fig tree, nor vine, nor olive either,
neither a pear tree nor any bed in the garden untended.

Yet I will tell you one thing more, and do not take it in anger:

you yourself are not well cared for, but with your old age upon you
wretchedly you are begrimed, and your clothing is mean and dishonored.

It is not surely for sloth that your master neglects you;

neither does anything slavish appear when one looks at you,
neither in shape nor stature;

you seem like a man who is kingly.

Such indeed you would seem, if you bathed and partook of your supper,
and then lay down upon softness;

for this is the due of the old ones.

But come now, tell me this, and recount it exactly and truly:

whose slave are you among men, and whose orchard are you tending?

And tell me this as well in truth, so that I may know clearly,
whether in fact we have come to this Ithaca, as was told me
by a man whom I met just now as I came here upon the roadway,
not very sound in his wits, since he had not the patience in him
either to tell me all things or listen through to my question
touching a guest-friend of mine, whether still he is living and present
or by now he is dead and gone to the house of Hades below.

For I will tell you this;

now attend and listen unto me:

once in my own dear fatherland country I welcomed a certain
man who had come to my house, and never yet any other
stranger from far away came as dear to my dwelling as he did.

He declared that his race was from Ithaca, and he told me
Laertes son of Arcesius was his father by birthright.

Him I led to my house, and I gave him a generous welcome,
loving him warmly and well, for there was abundance within doors,
and I bestowed on him gifts of friendship, as was fitting:

seven whole talents I gave him of gold well wrought by craftsmen,
and I gave him a mixing bowl all silver, flowered with ornament,
twelve plain cloaks, and as many rugs and spread-coverings with them,
just so many fair mantles besides, and tunics upon them,
and apart from these, women, four, who knew blameless handiwork,
shapely and skilled, and of these he might choose whichever he wished to.”
Then his father replied to him, shedding tears as he answered:

“Stranger, indeed you have reached the land for which you are asking,
but over it now violent men and reckless ones hold sway.

Therefore the gifts that you gave him, bestowing ten thousand favors,
all were in vain.

If only you had found him here in Ithaca
living, then surely with gifts in return he would have dismissed you
well, and with noble guest-right;

for so it is right with the giver.

But come now, tell me this, and recount it exactly and truly:

what year is this from the time when you welcomed that stranger,
your guest-friend, that unhappy man, my son, if ever I had one,
luckless child, whom somewhere far from his friends and his fatherland country
either fish in the sea have devoured, or else upon dry land
he became spoil for beasts and birds;

and neither his mother
wrapped and lamented him, nor his father, we who begot him;