But Rumor the messenger quickly went through the whole city,
telling abroad the suitors’ hateful death and destruction.

And they all heard together, and came from this side and that side,
groaning and lamenting before the house of Odysseus.

Out from the hall each household bore its dead and buried them;

but the others, from outlying towns, they sent to his own home,
setting each man on the fishers’ swift and seafaring vessels;

and they themselves went massed to the place of assembly, hearts grieving.

But when they had gathered and all were together assembled,
then among them Eupeithes rose up and addressed them:

for unbearable grief for his son lay deep in his spirit,
for Antinous, whom glorious Odysseus first had slaughtered.

For him shedding tears he spoke in the gathering and said this:

“Friends, this man has devised a great outrage against the Achaeans.

Some with his ships he led away, many and excellent fighters,
and he lost the curved ships, and he destroyed all the people.

Then coming back he killed the best by far of the Cephallenians.

Come then, before he can quickly get clear to sandy Pylos,
or even to shining Elis, where the Epeians are rulers,
let us go;

else afterward we shall be bowed down forever.

For this will be shame for men of later ages to hear of,
if we do not avenge the slayers of sons and of brothers.

For me there would not be sweetness at all in the life left before me,
but I would die with all speed and join those already perished.

But let us go, before they cross the strait and escape to the mainland.”
So he spoke, shedding tears, and pity seized all the Achaeans.

Then Medon came near to them, and the godlike singer with him,
out of the halls of Odysseus, since sleep had now released them.

In their midst they stood;

and astonishment seized every hearer.

Then Medon, understanding wise thoughts, spoke out among them:

“Hear me now, men of Ithaca;

for not without the gods’ will
did Odysseus devise and accomplish these deeds in the palace.

I myself saw an immortal god, who there beside Odysseus
stood very near, and in all things seemed to be Mentor.

Now this immortal god would appear before Odysseus,
giving him courage, and now through the hall would drive the suitors,
rushing among them;

and close-packed they tumbled and fell there.”
So he spoke, and beneath pale fear all of them were afflicted.

Then the old hero Halitherses spoke forth among them,
son of Mastor;

for he alone saw before and behind them.

He with good will toward them addressed the assembly and said this:

“Hear me now, men of Ithaca, and heed what I tell you.

By your own wickedness, friends, these things have come into being.

You would not listen to me, nor yet to Mentor, people’s shepherd,
when we said you must make your sons desist from their folly,
they who committed a monstrous deed in their evil presumption,
wasting the substance and bringing dishonor on the wife of
one of the noblest of men;

for they thought he would not come homeward.

So now let it stand as it is;

obey what I counsel.

Let us not go, lest someone discover self-chosen destruction.”
So he spoke, but they sprang up with a great cry, more than half of them;

yet the rest remained there gathered together in that place.

For in their hearts his word did not please them;

rather Eupeithes
they obeyed, and at once they made haste to get to their armor.

But when they had put upon their flesh the glittering bronze there,
they all assembled in front of the broad-wayed city together.

And among them Eupeithes led on, in his own great folly;

for he thought he would avenge the killing done to his son, yet never
was he destined to return, but there to encounter his death-spirit.

Then Athena addressed Zeus, the son of Cronos, and said this: