Hermes the Cyllenian summoned the souls and called them,
souls of the suitor men;

and he held in his hands the fair wand,
lovely and golden, the wand with which he bewitches men's vision,
whom he will, and again wakes others asleep from their slumber;

with it he stirred them and led, and they followed behind with thin squeaking.

As when bats in the depths of a marvellous cavern are flitting,
squeaking as ever they wheel, when one has dropped from the cluster
hanging there from the rock, and they cling to one another,
so they went with shrill crying together;

and Hermes before them,
Hermes the kindly, led down by the mouldering shadowy pathways.

Past the streams of Ocean they went, and the White Rock beside them,
past the gates of the Sun and past the land of the Dream-folk,
then in haste they arrived at the meadow of pale asphodel there,
where the souls make their home, the phantoms of mortals outwearied.

There they found the soul of Achilles, scion of Peleus,
and of Patroclus, and blameless Antilochus also,
and of Ajax, who was best in beauty and stature
of all the rest of the Danaans after the noble son of Peleus.

These stood there about Achilles;

and close beside them there also
came the soul of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, in sorrow,
grieving;

around him the rest were assembled, all those who beside him
died in the house of Aegisthus and met their destiny with him.

First then the soul of the grandson of Aeacus addressed him:

“Son of Atreus, we used to declare that Zeus of the bright bolt
loved you beyond all hero men all through the days of your lifetime,
seeing you ruled over many and mighty men as their master
there in the land of the Trojans, where we Achaeans bore anguish.

Yet even for you it seems the destructive fate was appointed
early to stand near by, that fate no mortal escapes from.

If only, receiving the honor of which you were lord and possessor,
there in the land of the Trojans you had met death and your doom then;

then all the Panchaeans would have built up a tomb to your glory,
and for your son thereafter you would have won mighty honor.

But now it was fated that death most pitiful should ensnare you.”
Then in turn the soul of the son of Atreus addressed him:

“Fortunate son of Peleus, Achilles, peer of immortals,
you who died there in Troy, far off from Argos;

around you
other men fell, the best of the sons of Trojans and Argives,
battling over your body;

while you in the whirling dust eddies
lay there immense in your might, forgetful now of horsemanship.

We for our part fought on through the whole day long, nor ever
would we have ceased from the war, had not Zeus with a storm-wind checked us.

But when we had brought you out of the battle and back to the shipping,
then on a bier we laid you, and washed your beautiful body
with warm water and oil;

and around you many the Danaans
poured out hot tears and sheared from their heads the hair in their grieving.

Then from the sea came your mother with the immortal sea women,
hearing the message;

and over the sea there rose an amazing
cry, and beneath it a shudder seized hold of all the Achaeans.

Then they would have leaped up and gone to the hollow ships in panic,
had not a man held them back, one knowing much from old seasons,
Nestor, whose counsel before had always appeared the best to us.

He with kind thought for them stood forth in assembly and told them:

“Stay, Argives;

do not flee, young sons of the Achaean people.

This is his mother who comes from the sea with immortal sea women,
coming to look on the face of her son now stricken by death.”
So he spoke, and the great-hearted Achaeans checked their terror.

Then about you there stood the daughters of the Ancient of Ocean,
mourning in piteous grief, and they put on you deathless raiment.