After him then at the rest he kept shooting his arrows of anguish,
aiming straight before him;

and they kept falling in heaps all around us.

It was plain that one of the gods was standing beside them in battle;

for then with fury they swept through the hall and struck all before them,
killing to right and to left, and hideous groaning arose there
as heads were battered;

the whole floor steamed with the blood of the fallen.

So we perished, Agamemnon;

and even now in this moment
our bodies lie without care in the halls of Odysseus.

For our dear ones at home in the house of each man do not know yet,
those who would wash from our wounds the black clotting blood that is on us
and lay us out with their mourning;

for that is the due of the dead men.”
Then in reply the spirit of Atreus' son spoke and addressed him:

“Blessed son of Laertes, Odysseus of many devices,
surely with great excellence you won for yourself such a woman.

How good was the mind in blameless Penelope's bosom,
daughter of Icarius, how well she remembered Odysseus,
her own wedded husband;

therefore her glory shall never perish,
no, for her excellence the immortals shall fashion a lovely
song upon earth among men for circumspect Penelope.

Not like the daughter of Tyndareus, who devised evil actions,
slaying her own wedded lord;

and hateful song shall attend her
out among humankind, and she will bring grievous reproach down
upon all womankind, even upon one who acts with goodness.”
So the two of them spoke such words to one another, conversing,
standing there in the house of Hades, beneath the earth's hidden places.

But the others, when down from the city they came, very quickly
reached the fair well-fashioned farm of Laertes, which once he
gained for himself after long toil and labor in plenty.

There was his house, and around it on every side were the shelters
where the serving men ate and sat and also took sleep there,
thralls of necessity, who worked at the things that he loved there.

In the house there was also an old Sicilian serving-woman;

carefully she tended the old man there on the farmland,
far from the city.

There Odysseus spoke to the thralls and his dear son:

“Now you others go into the well-built house all together,
and for our supper at once sacrifice the best of the swine there.

I for my part will make trial now of my father and test him,
whether he will know me and mark me well with his own eyes,
or fail to know me, his son, after so long a time in absence.”
So he spoke, and into the hands of the thralls he gave over the war-gear.

Then they went quickly on toward the house;

but noble Odysseus
moved more near to the orchard rich in fruit, with testing in mind there.

Yet descending into the great orchard he found no Dolius,
neither any of the thralls nor sons;

for they all had gone outward
gathering stones for a fence to wall in the orchard and vineyard,
and the old man himself was leading the way for the others.

So he found his father alone in the well-worked orchard there standing,
digging around a young plant;

and he wore a befouled tunic,
patched and shabby;

and round his shins he had fastened of oxhide
sewn leggings, to keep from the scratches;

and over his hands too
he had gloves because of the thorns;

and over his head he was wearing
a cap of goatskin, feeding the grief that swelled in his spirit.

But when enduring noble Odysseus had marked him and known him,
worn by old age, with the weight of heavy grief in his spirit,
standing beneath a tall pear tree he let the tears fall downward.