“Most glorious son of Atreus, lord of men Agamemnon,
all these things I remember, Zeus-nurtured king, as you tell them;

and to you I shall tell very clearly and truly the whole tale,
the evil end of our death, and how it came to completion.

We were courting the wife of Odysseus, long absent;

and she neither refused outright the hateful marriage nor ended it,
all the while preparing for us death and black destruction,
but in her mind she devised this other stratagem also:

setting a great loom up in the halls, she wove at her weaving,
delicate-threaded and wide beyond measure;

and quickly she told us:

“Young men, my suitors, since noble Odysseus has perished,
wait, though eager to wed me, until I finish this fabric,
lest the threads of my spinning should perish and come to no purpose,
as a burial shroud for the hero Laertes, against the hour
when the deadly fate of long-stretching death shall overtake him,
lest some Achaean woman somewhere among all the people
blame me if one who won much wealth should lie there without a death-shroud.”
So she spoke, and our proud heart within us was won to persuasion.

Then by day she would weave at the great loom through all the daylight,
but by night she unraveled it, once she had set by the torches.

Thus for three years she concealed it by guile and persuaded Achaeans;

but when the fourth year came on and the seasons arrived with it,
as the months waned away and many long days were accomplished,
then indeed one of her women spoke out, who knew of it clearly,
and we found her unraveling there the splendid weaving.

Thus she finished it then, though unwilling, compelled by necessity.

But when she showed us the cloth, after weaving the great web,
and after washing it, shining like sunlight or like the moonlight,
then at that very moment some evil divinity brought great Odysseus
from somewhere to the edge of the land where the swineherd was dwelling.

There too came the dear son of godlike Odysseus,
coming from sandy Pylos aboard his black ship returning.

And the two of them, devising evil death for the suitors,
came to the famous town;

and truly Odysseus came later,
while Telemachus went first before him leading the way there.

Then the swineherd led him, with poor clothes wrapped on his body,
like to a beggar in misery, and like to an old man,
leaning upon a staff, and mean clothes hung on his body.

None of us could discern him for the man that he truly was there,
when he appeared among us so suddenly, not even the elder men.

No, we kept on assailing him, hurling foul words and missiles.

Yet for a time in his own great halls he endured and was steadfast,
pelted with blows and taunts, with a heart that was patient in suffering.

But when the mind of Zeus of the aegis lifted and roused him,
then with Telemachus he took up the beautiful armor,
carried it into the chamber, and fastened the doors with the bolts there.

Then by the craft in his heart he instructed his own dear wife there
to set for the suitors the bow and the gray iron axes,
for us doomed men a contest of pain and beginning of slaughter.

Not a man there among us could draw on the string of that great bow,
no, we fell very far from the mark;

we were wholly deficient.

But when at last to the hands of Odysseus the great bow had come there,
then all of us shouted together and cried out against it,
not to hand him the bow, not even if much he should ask for it;

only Telemachus there kept urging him on and commanding.

Then in his hand he received it, resourceful enduring Odysseus,
and with ease he strung the great bow, and shot through the iron.

Then to the threshold he strode, and poured out the swift-flying arrows,
glaring around him in dread, and he struck down lordly Antinous.