Then the nine Muses all in succession with beautiful voices
sang the lament;

and no man of the Argives then would you notice
free of his tears, for so piercing the clear-voiced Muse had awakened.

Seventeen nights and days alike we mourned you together,
both we immortal gods and mortals that die upon earth here;

but on the eighteenth day we consigned you to fire, and around you
many fat sheep we slaughtered, and shambling cattle with curved horns.

You were burned in the garments of gods, with abundant ointment,
and with sweet honey;

and many Achaean heroes around you
marched in their armor about the pyre while it burned all around you,
footmen and horsemen alike;

and a great uproar arose there.

But when at last the flame of Hephaestus had wholly consumed you,
then at dawn, Achilles, we gathered your white bones together
into unmixed wine and oil;

and your mother had given
a golden two-handled urn, a gift, she said, of Dionysus,
and a work of Hephaestus, the god renowned far and widely.

Therein lie now your white bones, illustrious great Achilles,
mingled with dead Patroclus, the son of Menoetius,
and apart those of Antilochus, whom beyond all companions
most you honored of all after dead Patroclus had left you.

Over them then we heaped a great and a blameless tomb mound
we, the holy host of the Argive men skilled with the war-spear,
there on a jutting headland above the broad Hellespont,
so from the sea it might be visible far off to mortals,
men who are living now and the men who hereafter shall be.

Then your mother, petitioning the gods, sought prizes of splendor,
set them there in the midst of the games for the best of Achaeans.

Truly by now you have stood at the funeral contests of many
heroes, whenever a king has died and the young men about him
gird themselves and make themselves ready to strive for the prizes;

yet your heart would have marveled most if you had looked on those contests,
what surpassingly splendid prizes the goddess set out there
in your honor, silver-footed Thetis;

for dear were you to the gods all.

Thus not even in death did you lose your name, but forever
noble your glory shall be among all mankind, Achilles.

But for myself, what delight was there for me, after I finished the war-web?

For on my homeward way Zeus planned a pitiful ruin,
death at the hands of Aegisthus and my own accursed wife.”
Thus they spoke such things in turn, addressing each other,
when near to them came the guide, the slayer of Argus,
leading the souls of the suitors whom great Odysseus had mastered.

And in amazement the pair came straight toward them when I saw them.

Then the soul of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, knew him,
the dear son of Melaneus, renowned Amphimedon;

for in Ithaca once he had lived as his guest-friend in his household.

To him first spoke out the soul of the son of Atreus:

“Amphimedon, what befell you, that under the dark earth you entered,
all of you chosen men and all in the same bloom of your manhood?

A man would not choose better throughout a whole city of people.

Was it Poseidon who broke you aboard your ships on the seaways,
stirring against you harsh winds and the long heave of billows?

Or did hostile men destroy you somewhere ashore on the mainland
while you were driving off cattle, or beautiful flocks of sheep there,
or while in battle for city and women you fought to the finish?

Tell me, for I am asking;

for I declare I was your guest-friend.

Do you not remember when I came there into your dwelling,
urging Odysseus with godlike Menelaus beside me
to go with us to Ilium in the well-benched vessels?

A full month passed by while we traversed the wide sea altogether,
laboring hard to persuade Odysseus, sacker of cities.”
Then in return the soul of Amphimedon answered him: