“Father of us all, son of Cronos, highest of all the mighty,
tell me, as I ask you, what plan in your heart are you hiding?

Will you stir up again evil war and terrible battle,
or instead will you establish friendship between both parties?”
Then Zeus the cloud-gatherer answered her and said to her:

“My child, why do you ask me of this and inquire into it?

Was it not you yourself who shaped this counsel in your thinking,
that Odysseus on coming home should exact payment from those men?

Do as ever you please;

but I shall tell you what is the fitting.

Now when godlike Odysseus has punished the suitors,
let them cut binding oaths, and let him be king forever;

and let us cast a forgetting on slaughter of children
and of brothers;

and let them keep loving each other
just as before, and let there be wealth and peace in abundance.”
So he spoke, and he roused Athena, already eager before this;

down she darted away from the peaks of Olympus.

Now when they had put from them desire for honey-sweet eating,
then among them godlike Odysseus, long-suffering, started:

“Let some man go outside and see if they now are approaching.”
So he spoke, and the son of Dolius went, as he bade him;

going he stood on the threshold, and saw that they all were close by;

quickly then he addressed Odysseus with winged words, saying:

“Here they are now, close at hand;

but let us arm all the faster.”
So he spoke, and they sprang to their feet and put on their armor,
four men around Odysseus, and six of the sons of Dolius;

and with them Laertes and Dolius also armed themselves,
though they were gray-haired men, yet still by necessity fighters.

But when they had clothed all their flesh in the gleaming bronze armor,
then they opened the doors and went out, and Odysseus led them.

Then there came close by them Athena, the daughter of Zeus, there,
like to Mentor in build and in voice altogether.

Seeing her, then godlike Odysseus, long-suffering, rejoiced there,
and at once to Telemachus, his own dear son, he addressed him:

“Telemachus, now you yourself will know this, entering battle,
where men fight face to face, and the best men are sifted and chosen:

never disgrace the line of your fathers, who long before this time
have surpassed all the earth in valor and manly courage.”
Then in turn wise Telemachus answered his father and said this:

“You will see, if you wish it, dear father, with this heart within me,
I shall not bring disgrace on your line, as you tell me.”
So he spoke, and Laertes rejoiced and spoke out a saying:

“What a day this indeed is for me, dear gods;

I am joyful.

Son and son's son are contending together concerning prowess.”
Then standing beside him gray-eyed Athena addressed him:

“Son of Arceisius, dearest by far of all my companions,
pray to the gray-eyed maiden and Zeus who is father above her,
then with a great swing hurl forth your spear that casts a long shadow.”
So she spoke, and Pallas Athena breathed great strength within him.

Then he prayed to the daughter of Zeus the mighty in heaven,
and with a great swing hurled forth his spear that casts a long shadow,
and he struck Eupeithes straight through his bronze-cheeked helmet.

Yet the spear was not held by the helm, but the bronze point drove through it;

down he crashed as he fell, and his armor clattered upon him.

Then on the front fighters Odysseus fell, and his glorious son too,
striking with swords and with spears that were sharpened at both ends.

Then indeed they would have destroyed them all and deprived them of homecoming,
had not Athena, the child of Zeus who bears the aegis,
cried out with her voice and held back all the people together: