Yet now in my heart I terribly fear that at any moment
all the Ithacans here will come against us, and they will
send out tidings abroad to the towns of the Cephallenians.”
Then resourceful Odysseus answered and said to him:

“Take heart;

do not let these things be matters of care in your spirit.

Come, let us go to the house, which lies close here by the orchard.

There I sent on ahead Telemachus, and the cowherd,
and the swineherd, so they might prepare us supper with all speed.”
So after speaking thus, they went to the beautiful dwelling.

And when now they arrived at the well-inhabited homestead,
there they found Telemachus, and the cowherd, and swineherd
carving abundant meat and mixing the gleaming dark wine.

Meanwhile in his own house great-hearted Laertes was tended:

a Sicilian handmaid bathed him and rubbed him with olive,
and then around him she cast a beautiful cloak;

and Athena
standing close by made strong the limbs of the shepherd of people,
and she made him greater to see, and more stalwart than formerly.

Out from the bath he stepped, and his dear son marveled at seeing
face to face how like to the immortal gods he had become there;

then calling to him he addressed him with winged words, saying:

“Father, surely one of the gods who are everlasting
made you better to look on in stature and beauty of body.”
Then in return wise Laertes answered and spoke to him:

“If only, father Zeus, and Athena, and lord Apollo,
such as I was when I took Nericus, strongly founded,
there on the cape of the mainland, as lord of Cephallenians,
such a man I had been but yesterday in our own halls,
with armor upon my shoulders, to stand by you and defend you
against the suitor men;

then many of them I would have
loosened the knees in the house, and your own heart would have rejoiced there.”
Thus then the two of them spoke such things to one another.

But when the others had ceased from labor and made ready the banquet,
then they sat down in order on benches and chairs in a row there.

And just as they were setting their hands to the meal before them,
there came old Dolius near, and with him the sons of the old man,
wearied out from the field work, because his mother had called them,
the old Sicilian woman who raised them and lovingly tended
him, the old man, ever since crushing old age overtook him.

And when they saw Odysseus and marked him there in their spirits,
they stood in the hall astonished;

but then Odysseus
greeted them kindly and spoke to them, fastening speech on them:

“Old sir, sit down to supper, and let your amazement be ended.

Long have we waited here in the hall, desiring our supper,
holding back from the meal and expecting you always to enter.”
So he spoke, and Dolius came straight on, with both hands extended;

and Odysseus grasped his hand and kissed him there at the wrist joint.

Then calling to him he addressed him with winged words, saying:

“Dear friend, since you have returned, long hoped for among us servants,
though we had given up hope;

yet the gods themselves brought you homeward.

Hail, and rejoice exceedingly;

may the gods grant you blessings.

But tell me this thing truly, so that I may know it clearly:

does circumspect Penelope already know of it,
that you have come home here, or shall we send her a herald?”
Then resourceful Odysseus answered and said to him:

“Old man, she knows already.

Why should you trouble with this matter?”
So he spoke, and again he sat on the well-polished stool there.

So likewise the sons of Dolius gathered round noble Odysseus,
greeting him warmly with words, and clasping his hands in their own hands,
then in due order sat down beside Dolius, their father.

Thus they in the halls were intent on the meal before them.