neither his richly dowered wife, wise-hearted Penelope,
wailed for her own dear husband upon his bed, as was fitting,
drawing his eyes shut down;

for this is the due of the departed.

And tell me this as well in truth, so that I may know clearly:

who and from where are you among men?

Where is your city and parentage?

Where does the swift ship stand that conveyed you hitherward
and your godlike companions?

Or did you come as a passenger
on another man’s ship, and they put you ashore and departed?”
Then resourceful Odysseus in turn made answer and told him:

“Then indeed I will tell you all things exactly and truly.

I am from Alybas, where my renowned house has its dwelling;

I am son of Apheidas, of lordly Polypemon descended;

and my own name is Eperitus.

Yet some spirit or other
drove me astray from Sicania to come here against my wishing.

My ship stands yonder away from the town by the edge of the farmland.

But as for Odysseus, this now is the fifth turning year-sum
since he went away from there and departed out of my country,
luckless man.

Yet indeed there were favorable birds for his journey,
birds on the right, and I rejoiced in them as I sent him onward,
and he too was glad as he went;

and the heart in us both was still hoping
we would meet again in guest-friendship and exchange splendid presents.”
So he spoke, and a black cloud of sorrow enveloped the old man.

Then with both of his hands he took up the dark sooty dust there
and poured it over his white head, groaning heavily, deeply.

Then the spirit within Odysseus was stirred;

through his nostrils
sharp pain struck as he looked on his father beloved before him.

Then he sprang and embraced him and kissed him, and thus he addressed him:

“Father, why, I am this man myself, whom you have been seeking,
home in the twentieth year I have come to the land of my fathers.

But hold back now from weeping and tearful lamentation.

For I will tell you the truth;

yet even so we must hurry:

I have slain the suitors inside our own halls and chambers,
making them pay for their soul-wounding shame and their evil.”
Then in return wise Laertes answered and spoke to him:

“If indeed you are Odysseus, my son, and have come here,
tell me a sign now, plain to be known, so I may believe you.”
Then resourceful Odysseus answered him, saying:

“First of all, mark this scar here clearly with your own eyesight,
where on Parnassus a boar drove in on me with his white tusk
when I had gone there;

for you had sent me, and my honored
mother as well, to Autolycus, dear father of my mother,
so I might receive the gifts he promised me here and assented.

But come, let me also recount the trees in the thriving orchard
which once you gave to me, when I kept begging for each one,
being a child and following you through the garden behind you;

there we passed among them, and you named and told them all to me.

Thirteen pear trees you gave me, and ten apple trees also,
and forty fig trees;

and of the vine rows you named me
fifty to give, and each one had its season of vintage;

there on the vines all manner of clusters were hanging,
whenever the seasons of Zeus came pressing them down from above.”
So he spoke, and the old man's knees and dear heart were loosened,
for he knew the sure signs Odysseus had clearly recounted.

Round his beloved son he flung both arms in embrace there;

and great-enduring noble Odysseus caught him while swooning.

But when again he drew breath and his spirit came back to his bosom,
then once more in reply he addressed him and answered:

“Father Zeus, then surely the gods still dwell on Olympus,
if in truth the suitors have paid for their reckless outrage.