And Hermes of Cyllene was calling out the souls
of the suitor-men.

He held in his hands the rod,
beautiful, golden, with which he charms men's eyes
to sleep, whose eyes he wills, and wakes others from their slumber;

with this he set them moving and led them, and they followed, squeaking.

As when bats in the corner of a wondrous cave
flit squeaking, when one drops off
the chain of them clinging to the rock and to each other:

so these went with him, squeaking;

and Hermes
the kindly led them down along the dank ways.

Past the streams of Ocean they went, past the White Rock,
past the gates of the Sun and the country of dreams,
and soon they came to the meadow of asphodel,
where the souls have their dwelling — the phantoms of the worn-out dead.

There they found the soul of Achilles, Peleus' son,
and of Patroclus, and of blameless Antilochus,
and of Ajax, who was first in beauty and in build
of all the Danaans after the blameless son of Peleus.

These were gathered around Achilles;

and close to them
came the soul of Agamemnon, Atreus' son,
grieving;

and around him others were gathered — all who died
beside him in Aegisthus' house, and met their fate.

And the soul of Peleus' son spoke to him first:

"Son of Atreus, we used to say that you, of all
the hero-men, were dear to Zeus who delights in thunder
all your days — because you were lord over many strong men
in the land of the Trojans, where we Achaeans suffered.

And yet it was to you that ruinous doom
would come so early — the doom no man born escapes.

If only, in the fullness of the honor you were lord of,
you had met your death and fate in the land of the Trojans:

then all the Achaeans together would have made your tomb,
and you would have won great fame for your son hereafter.

As it was, your portion was to be caught by the most pitiful of deaths."
Then the soul of Atreus' son answered him:

"Blessed son of Peleus, Achilles like the gods,
who died at Troy, far from Argos — and around you the others
fell, the best of the sons of Trojans and Achaeans,
fighting over your body;

and you in the swirl of the dust
lay great in your greatness, your horsemanship forgotten.

And we fought the whole day through, and would never
have ceased from the fighting, had Zeus not stopped us with a storm.

And when we had carried you out of the battle to the ships,
we laid you on a bier, and cleansed your beautiful body
with warm water and with oil;

and over you the Danaans
shed many hot tears, and cut their hair.

And out of the sea your mother came, with the deathless sea-women,
when she heard the news;

and a cry went up over the deep,
unearthly — and trembling took hold of all the Achaeans.

They would have sprung up then and fled to the hollow ships,
had not a man held them back, one deep in old wisdom:

Nestor, whose counsel had shown truest long before.

With good will toward them he spoke out and said:

'Hold, Argives!

Do not run, young men of the Achaeans!

It is his mother coming out of the sea, with the deathless
sea-women, to look on the face of her dead son.'
So he spoke, and the great-hearted Achaeans checked their flight.

And around you stood the daughters of the old man of the sea,
mourning piteously;

and they wrapped you in imperishable clothing.

And the Muses, all nine, answering voice to lovely voice,
sang the dirge.

Not one Argive could you have seen
unweeping then, so keen was the clear Muse's song.

Seventeen days together, nights and days alike,
we mourned you — deathless gods and mortal men;

on the eighteenth we gave you to the fire, and around you
slaughtered fat sheep in plenty and spiral-horned cattle.

You burned in the clothing of the gods, in oil in plenty
and in sweet honey;