Then the soul of Atreus' son answered him:

"Blessed son of Laertes, Odysseus of the many devices —
truly you won a wife of great excellence!

How sound the mind of blameless Penelope,
Icarius' daughter!

How faithfully she kept the memory
of Odysseus, her wedded husband!

And so the fame of her excellence
will never perish;

and the deathless ones will make
a song for those on earth, a song of grace, for steady-hearted Penelope —
not like the daughter of Tyndareus, who plotted evil,
who killed her wedded husband:

a song of loathing
she will be among mankind;

and she brings hard fame
on all women — on womankind, even on those who do right."
So the two of them spoke to one another of such things,
standing in the house of Hades, under the hidden places of the earth.

And the others — when they had gone down from the city, they soon reached
the beautiful well-worked farm of Laertes, which Laertes himself
had won long ago, when his labors for it were many.

There was his house, and running all around it the sheds
where the bound slaves ate, and sat, and slept —
the ones whose labor did his will.

And in the house was an old Sicilian woman, who cared
for the old man devotedly, out on the farm far from the town.

And there Odysseus spoke to the slaves and to his son:

"You now — go inside the well-built house,
and slaughter for dinner, right away, the best of the pigs;

and I will make a trial of my father —
whether he will know me, whether his eyes will make me out,
or fail to know a son so long away."
So speaking he handed the slaves his weapons of war.

They went quickly on into the house;

and Odysseus
moved up toward the fruited orchard, testing.

And going down into the great garden he found no Dolius,
none of the slaves, none of the sons:

they had gone off
gathering fieldstones for the orchard wall,
and the old man had led them the way.

So he found his father alone in the well-worked orchard,
spading round a young tree — in a filthy tunic,
patched, disgraceful;

round his shins he had bound
stitched leggings of oxhide, to fend off the scratches,
and gloves on his hands because of the thorns;

and on his head
he wore a goatskin cap — feeding his sorrow.

And when much-enduring noble Odysseus saw him —
broken with old age, the great grief packed inside him —
he stopped beneath a towering pear tree, and wept.

Then he weighed it in his mind and in his heart:

to kiss his father, and hold him, and tell him everything —
how he had come, how he had reached his fathers' land —
or question him first, and test him through and through.

And as he weighed it, this seemed to him the better way:

to try him first with words that bite.

With this in mind, noble Odysseus went straight up to him.

He was holding his head down, spading round his tree,
and standing beside him his shining son spoke to him:

"Old man — no lack of skill in you at tending
an orchard!

Everything is beautifully kept:

not one thing —
no plant, no fig tree, no vine, no olive,
no pear tree, no vegetable bed — goes untended in this garden.

But another thing I will say — and do not take anger into your heart:

you — you are not well kept.

Hard old age is on you,
and with it you are shabby with grime, and clothed in disgrace.

It cannot be for idleness that your master neglects you;

and there is nothing of the slave to be seen in you,
in your face or your stature:

you look like a kingly man.

You look like one who, after his bath and his dinner,
should sleep on softness:

for that is the right of the old.

But come, tell me this, and tell it to me truly:

Whose slave are you?

Whose orchard do you tend?

And tell me this too, honestly, so that I may know it: