Then every day she wove at the great loom,
and every night she unwove it by torchlight.

Three years her trick escaped us, and she kept the Achaeans persuaded;

but when the fourth year came, as the seasons rolled on,
the months waning away, the long tale of days accomplished,
then one of her women, who knew it all, told us,
and we caught her unweaving the shining web.

So she finished it — against her will, under force.

And when she had shown us the robe — the great web woven
and washed — and it shone like the sun or the moon,
just then some evil god brought Odysseus from somewhere
to the border of the land, where the swineherd had his house.

There came also the dear son of godlike Odysseus,
back in his black ship out of sandy Pylos;

and the two of them plotted an evil death for the suitors
and came to the famous town — Odysseus
later;

it was Telemachus who led the way before him.

The swineherd brought the master, in bad clothes on his body,
in the likeness of a beggar, wretched and old,
leaning on a stick, with miserable clothing on his body;

and not one of us could know him for the man he was,
breaking on us suddenly like that — not even the older men —
no:

we went at him with ugly words, and with things thrown.

And he for a while endured it in his own halls,
pelted and taunted, with an enduring heart;

but when the mind of Zeus who bears the aegis roused him,
with Telemachus he lifted the beautiful armor away
and stowed it in the storeroom and shot the bolts,
and then — his cunning at work — he ordered his wife
to set before the suitors the bow and the gray iron,
the contest for us star-crossed men, and the beginning of the slaughter.

And not one of us could stretch the string
of that strong bow:

we fell far, far short of it.

But when the great bow came into Odysseus' hands,
then all of us together shouted out threats
not to give him the bow, however much he pleaded;

only Telemachus urged him on and commanded it.

And he took it in his hand, much-enduring noble Odysseus,
and strung the bow with ease, and shot through the iron,
and went and stood on the threshold, and poured out the swift arrows,
glaring terribly — and he shot Antinous the king.

And then he sent his groaning shafts into the others,
aiming straight ahead;

and they fell in heaps.

It was plain some god was their helper in the fight:

for storming down the hall in their fury they killed
left and right, and hideous groaning rose
as heads were smashed, and the whole floor smoked with blood.

So we perished, Agamemnon — and even now
our bodies lie uncared-for in the halls of Odysseus:

for the friends in each man's house do not yet know —
the ones who would wash the black gore from our wounds
and lay us out with wailing:

for that is the portion of the dead."