then I would have unstrung the knees of many of them
there in the halls — and the heart in you would have been glad!"
So they spoke to one another of such things.

And when the others had finished their work and made the meal,
they sat down in order on the benches and the chairs,
and were just putting their hands to the food, when up came
the old man Dolius, and with him the old man's sons,
tired out from their field-work:

their mother had gone out
and called them — the old Sicilian woman, who raised them
and tended the old man devotedly, now that age had hold of him.

And when they saw Odysseus, and their hearts took it in,
they stopped in the hall, astounded.

But Odysseus
fastened on them with gentle words and said:

"Old man — sit down to dinner, and all of you, forget your wonder.

We have been waiting in the hall a long while, eager
to put our hands to the bread, expecting you every minute."
So he spoke;

and Dolius came straight at him, both arms
spread wide;

and he caught Odysseus' hand and kissed it at the wrist,
and lifting his voice he spoke winged words:

"Dear master — since you have come home to us who longed for you
and had given up believing, and the gods themselves have brought you:

health, and all joy to you, and may the gods give you happiness!

But tell me this thing truly, so that I may know it:

does watchful-minded Penelope know already
that you are home — or shall we send a messenger?"
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered him:

"Old man, she knows already.

Why should you be busied with that?"
So he spoke;

and Dolius sat back down on the polished stool.

And in the same way the sons of Dolius, around famous Odysseus,
pressed his hands and welcomed him with words,
and sat down in order beside Dolius their father.

So they were busy with dinner in the house.

But Rumor the messenger went darting through the city everywhere,
crying the hateful death and doom of the suitors.

And the people heard it all at once, and gathered
from every side, with groans and wailing, before the house of Odysseus.

Each family carried its dead out of the house, and buried them;

and the dead of the other cities they sent home,
laying each man aboard the fishermen's fast ships;

and they went in a body to the assembly-place, grieving at heart.

And when they were assembled, all gathered together,
Eupeithes rose among them and spoke:

for a grief there was no forgetting lay upon his heart —
for his son, Antinous, the first man noble Odysseus killed;

weeping for him he rose and spoke among them:

"Friends — a monstrous work this man has wrought against the Achaeans!

Some he led off in the ships — many men, and brave ones —
and he lost the hollow ships, and lost the people;

and some he has killed on his return — far the best of the Cephallenians.

Come then — before he can get away quickly to Pylos,
or to shining Elis, where the Epeians hold power —
let us move!

Or we hang our heads in shame forever after.

This is a disgrace even for men unborn to hear of,
if we do not take vengeance on the murderers of our sons
and our brothers.

For me — there would be no sweetness left
in living:

I would rather die at once and be among the perished.

Move — before they get across the water and away from us!"
So he spoke, weeping;

and pity took hold of all the Achaeans.

But now Medon came up to them, and the godlike singer,
out of the halls of Odysseus, for sleep had let them go;

they stood in the middle of them;

and amazement took every man.

And Medon, whose mind knew wisdom, spoke among them:

"Hear me now, men of Ithaca.

Not without the will
of the deathless gods did Odysseus devise these things.

I myself saw a deathless god, who stood
close beside Odysseus, and looked in all things like Mentor;