is this land we have come to truly Ithaca, as that man
told me who met me on the road just now —
not too well furnished in the wits:

he had not the patience
to tell me everything or hear out my question
about a guest-friend of mine — whether he lives still,
or is dead by now, and down in the house of Hades.

For I will tell you this;

mark it and hear me:

I once played host, in my own dear country, to a man
who came to our place;

and never has another mortal
of all the far-come strangers been more welcome in my house.

He declared his stock was out of Ithaca;

he said
his father was Laertes, Arceisius' son.

So I brought him to the house and gave him welcome,
warm and openhanded — the house had plenty in it —
and I gave him gifts of friendship, such as fitted:

seven talents of well-worked gold I gave him,
a mixing-bowl all silver, worked with flowers,
twelve single cloaks, as many coverlets,
as many beautiful mantles, tunics with them,
and besides all this, four women skilled in blameless
handwork, good-looking ones — his own choice, whichever he would."
And his father answered him, weeping:

"Stranger, you have come indeed to the land you ask for —
but violent men hold it now, men lost to decency.

The gifts you showered on him — the countless gifts — were wasted.

If you had found him alive in the land of Ithaca,
he would have sent you off well matched in gifts,
well hosted too:

that is the law, for whoever begins the kindness.

But come, tell me this, and tell it to me truly:

how many years is it since you hosted him —
that guest of yours, that luckless man — my son, if he ever was:

my ill-starred son?

Whom, far from his friends and his fathers' land,
either the fish have eaten in the sea, or on dry ground
he has become the spoil of beasts and birds;

and his mother
never shrouded and mourned him, nor his father — we who bore him;

nor did his richly dowered wife, steady-hearted Penelope,
keen over her own husband on the bier, as was fitting,
or close his eyes:

and that is the portion of the dead.

And tell me this too, honestly, so that I may know it:

What man are you, and from where?

Where are your city and your parents?

And where is the fast ship standing that brought you here
with your godlike companions?

Or did you come a passenger
on another's ship, which set you down and went on?"
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered him:

"Then I will tell you everything exactly.

I am from Alybas, where I have my famous house:

son of Apheidas, the son of lord Polypemon;

my own name is Eperitus.

But a god
drove me wandering here from Sicania, against my will,
and my ship stands off the fields, away from the town.

As for Odysseus — this is now the fifth year
since he went from there, and left my country —
the ill-starred man!

And yet the birds were good when he set out:

on the right;

and I rejoiced in them as I sent him off,
and he rejoiced as he went.

And the heart in both of us hoped
we would meet again as guest-friends, and give each other shining gifts."
So he spoke;

and a black cloud of grief closed over the old man:

with both hands he scooped up the scorched gray dust
and poured it down over his white head, sobbing thick and fast.

And the heart of Odysseus was shaken;

up through his nostrils
shot the sharp sting of tears — his father before his eyes.

He sprang to him, and caught him in his arms, and kissed him:

"Father — I am he.

I myself, the man you ask for,
come home in the twentieth year to my fathers' land.

Stop now — no more weeping, no more tears and mourning.

For I tell you this — and the need to hurry is very great:

I have killed the suitors in our own halls;

I have punished their heart-stinging outrage and their evil deeds."
Then Laertes answered him and said: