and many Achaean heroes
moved in armor around your burning pyre,
men on foot and horsemen, and a great roar went up.

And when the flame of Hephaestus had made an end of you,
at dawn we gathered your white bones, Achilles,
into unmixed wine and oil.

Your mother gave
a golden two-eared jar — a gift of Dionysus,
she said, and the work of famous Hephaestus.

In that lie your white bones, shining Achilles,
mingled with the bones of dead Patroclus, Menoetius' son,
and apart lie Antilochus', whom you honored beyond
all your other companions after Patroclus died.

And over them all we heaped a great and blameless tomb —
we, the sacred army of Argive spearmen —
on a jutting headland over the broad Hellespont,
so it might be seen far off, from the open sea,
by men now living and by men to come.

And your mother asked the gods for prizes of great beauty
and set them in the middle of the field, for the best of the Achaeans.

You have stood by now at the funeral games of many
heroes — when a king has died, and the young men
belt themselves and make ready for the prizes —
but had you seen those, your heart would have wondered most:

what beautiful prizes the goddess set out in your honor,
silver-footed Thetis.

For you were most dear to the gods.

So not even in death did you lose your name:

forever,
among all mankind, your fame will be noble, Achilles.

But I?

What joy of it had I, when I had wound the war to its end?

On my homecoming Zeus devised a wretched death for me
at the hands of Aegisthus and my accursed wife."
So they spoke to one another of such things.

And the guide came near them, the slayer of Argus,
leading down the souls of the suitors Odysseus broke;

and the two, amazed, went straight toward them at the sight.

And the soul of Agamemnon, Atreus' son, knew
the dear son of Melaneus, far-famed Amphimedon:

for he had been his guest-friend, with his home in Ithaca.

The soul of Atreus' son spoke to him first:

"Amphimedon, what has happened to you, that you plunge under the dark earth,
all of you picked men, all of an age?

A man choosing
the best in a city could not have chosen better.

Did Poseidon break you in your ships,
raising cruel winds and long waves?

Or did enemies on land destroy you
while you were cutting out their cattle and fine flocks of sheep,
or as they fought for their city and their women?

Answer what I ask:

I declare myself your guest-friend.

Do you not remember when I came to your house there,
with godlike Menelaus, to urge Odysseus
to follow with us to Ilium on the well-benched ships?

A whole month it took us to cross all that wide sea,
and hard work to win over Odysseus, sacker of cities."
Then the soul of Amphimedon answered him:

"Most glorious son of Atreus, Agamemnon lord of men,
I remember all of it, Zeus-nurtured, as you tell it;

and I will recount to you everything, fully and truly —
the evil end of our death, how it was brought to pass.

We were courting the wife of Odysseus — of the man so long away.

She neither refused the marriage she loathed, nor would she make an end,
plotting for us death and the black doom;

no — here is another trick her heart devised:

she set up a great loom in the halls and wove at it,
fine-threaded, beyond all measure wide, and told us straightway:

'Young men, my suitors — since noble Odysseus is dead,
wait, though you burn for my wedding, till I finish
this cloth — let my spinning not be wasted on the wind —
a shroud for the hero Laertes, against the day
the ruinous doom of death that lays men low will take him:

let no Achaean woman in the land hold it against me
that a man who won so much should lie without his winding-sheet.'
So she spoke, and our proud hearts were persuaded.