always from Ocean the singing and soft-blowing breath of the West Wind
rises to give human beings refreshment and coolness of spirit,
since Helen is your wife and therefore you are son-in-law to great Zeus.’
Thus having spoken, he plunged underneath the turbulent sea swell.

Back to the ships I returned with my godlike traveling companions;

darkly the heart in my bosom was troubled by many reflections.

Then, when we came to the edge of the sea and the vessel awaiting,
there we prepared and consumed our supper, and ambrosial nighttime
came, and we laid ourselves down on the surf-beaten strand of the sea-way.

When Dawn in her earliness rose with her rose-colored fingers,
first of all we dragged down the vessels to glittering seawater,
setting the masts and the sails in the ships with symmetrical bodies.

Men then boarded the ships and sat down in their places at oarlocks;

seated in order, they struck with the oars on the gray-colored water.

Back to the waters of Egypt I brought my assembled vessels,
up the heaven-descended river, and offered full hecatombs there.

Then, when I laid to rest the wrath of the gods everlasting,
over the king Agamemnon I heaped up a mound for his deathless
fame.

This done, I sailed, and the gods everlasting provided
wind and immediately brought me again to the land of my fathers.

Come now, remain as a guest in the halls of my household a little,
staying until the eleventh or twelfth day arrives in its season.

Then I shall send you away with due honor and give you fine presents:

three strong horses together with one well-polished conveyance;

also a beautiful cup, so that you may pour to immortals,
always remembering me through all of the days of your lifetime.”
Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:

“Atreus’ son, do not hold me for any long time in your household.

Gladly I might for a year remain here and sit at your side still,
feeling no longing arise for my home or the parents who bore me,
such a strange and miraculous joy do I take in the tales you deliver,
also your words;

but my own companions are restive already,
waiting in sacred Pylos, and you would retain me here longer.

As for the gift you are giving, let it be some treasure I carry.

Horses I shall not conduct to Ithaca;

here I shall leave them
for you to keep and your glory, for you are the lord of a broad plain,
where an abundance of lotus and galingale grows for the horses,
wheat and the grain of the spelt and the broad white barley for fodder.

Ithaca holds no broad-running courses or pasture land open;

goat-feeding country, more lovely to me than a horse-feeding country.

None of the islands that lean toward the sea is a land made for horses,
none is rich in its meadows, and Ithaca less than the others.”
Thus he spoke, and Menelaus renowned for the war cry smiled there;

stroking him there with his hand, he addressed him aloud by his name there:

“Dear child, you are of excellent blood, as your speech makes apparent.

Therefore I gladly shall alter the gifts, since I have the power.

Out of the many treasures that lie in the halls of my household,
I shall present you the one most beautiful and most highly valued:

one mixing bowl elaborately wrought, made wholly of silver,
while all the rims have been given their finish in glittering gold-work,
workmanship done by Hephaestus.

The hero and king Phaedimus,
lord of Sidonian people, presented the bowl when his household
sheltered me on my returning journey.

This gift I give you.”
Thus they exchanged such words in the presence of one another.

Feasting companions came to the house of the godlike ruler,
driving the sheep and carrying heart-strengthening wine to the banquet;

women with beautiful veils sent bread to the palace before them.