I would have founded a city in Argos for him, made a house there,
bringing him out of Ithaca, all his possessions and offspring,
all of his people, and emptying one of the cities around me,
cities that lie all around and submit to my rule as their master.

Living together, we often would mingle, and nothing between us
ever could part us, delighting in love and affectionate friendship,
till the black cloud that is death had enfolded and covered us over.

Yet, I imagine, godhead himself must have looked with resentment,
making that sorrowful man alone unable to reach home.”
Thus he spoke and awakened in all a longing for mourning.

Helen of Argos wept, the daughter of Zeus in her beauty;

young Telemachus wept, Menelaus the offspring of Atreus;

nor could the glorious son born of Nestor keep dry his eyelids,
since in his spirit he thought of the irreproachable man Antilochus,
killed by the radiant son of the shining and early-born Dawn.

Calling him into his mind, he spoke, and his words took wing outward:

“Lord Menelaus, old Nestor always declared you the wisest
man among mortals, whenever at home we remembered your story,
sitting inside of his halls and exchanging our questions and answers.

Therefore, if possible, listen to me, for I take no pleasure
weeping when supper is ended;

and Dawn in her earliness soon shall
come to us also.

I do not begrudge lamentation for any
mortal who dies and encounters the doom that has been appointed.

This is the only respect that remains for afflicted human beings:

cutting a lock of the hair and letting a tear down the cheek there.

I too had a brother who died, and he was not the meanest
man of the Argives;

you knew him, though I neither knew him nor saw him.

Yet they declare that above all others the lord Antilochus
excelled in speed of his feet and excelled as a warrior in battle.”
Then in reply fair-haired Menelaus addressed him, saying:

“Dear friend, all you have spoken is such as a prudent man might have
spoken and acted, even a man who was older than you are.

Such is your father;

therefore your words have been fashioned with wisdom.

Easily known is the seed of a man for whom Cronos’ offspring
spins out prosperity both in his marriage and birth of his children,
just as he now has granted to Nestor throughout all his lifetime,
gently to age in his halls in the midst of abundant possessions,
while all his sons are intelligent men and unrivaled with spears there.

Now we shall cease the lamentation that came down upon us,
turning our thoughts once again to the meal;

let the servants pour water
over our hands.

In the morning again there shall be many stories
young Telemachus and I may exchange and relate to each other.”
Thus he spoke, and Asphalion poured clean water upon them,
diligent servant attending the famous and lordly Menelaus.

Then to the excellent food lying ready they stretched out their two hands.

Helen, the daughter of Zeus, then formed a new thought in her bosom:

into the wine they were drinking at once she cast down a medicine,
quieting anger and grief and bringing forgetfulness of evil.

Whoever drank it once it was thoroughly mixed in the wine bowl
would not allow a tear to descend on his cheeks for a whole day,
not if his mother and father were both lying dead there before him,
not if in front of his face men murdered his brother or dear son,
cutting him down with the bronze, and his own eyes looked on the murder.

Such were the cunning and excellent medicines Zeus’ daughter
owned, given her by Polydamna, the consort of Thon, the Egyptian.

There the grain-giving earth produces the greatest abundance
drugs, many wholesome when mixed, and many a harmful one also.