Difficult is it for any mortal man ever to master godhead.’
Thus did I speak, and the radiant goddess at once gave me answer:

‘Then I shall tell you, O stranger, and all that I tell shall be truthful.

When in his course Helios bestrides the middle of heaven,
then from the sea comes the deathless and infallible Ancient of Ocean,
under the West Wind’s breath, in the dark-colored shiver of water;

out he emerges and lies down under the hollowed-out caverns.

Seals gather round him, the brood of the beautiful daughter of ocean,
crowded together in sleep after coming from gray-colored seawater,
breathing the pungent and terrible odor of deep briny water.

There I shall lead you myself at the earliest showing of daylight,
lay you in order;

but carefully choose three men from your comrades,
all of the best you possess by your vessels with well-fitted benches.

I shall reveal every cunning device the old god may employ there.

First he shall go to the seals and count every one as he passes;

after he counts them by fives and has looked at the whole of the number,
down in their midst he shall lie like a shepherd at rest in his sheep flock.

Then at the moment you see he is settled and lying among them,
strength and the force of your hands must remain at the heart of your thinking.

Hold him securely for all of his struggling and striving to flee you.

Every device he shall try, transforming to all living creatures
crawling the earth, then changing to water and god-kindled firelight;

hold him unshaken, however, and press him with greater compulsion.

Yet when at last he himself puts a question in words and addresses
you in the same outward shape he possessed when you saw him lie sleeping,
then, O hero, relax your force and release the old godhead.

Ask which divinity troubles you so and blocks you from homeward,
also your homecoming, how you may sail over fish-thronging sea-way.’
Thus having spoken, she plunged underneath the turbulent sea swell.

Back to the ships I returned where they stood in the sand of the seashore;

darkly the heart in my bosom was troubled by many reflections.

Then, when I came to the edge of the sea and the vessel awaiting,
there we prepared and consumed our supper, and ambrosial nighttime
came, and we laid ourselves down on the surf-beaten strand of the sea-way.

When Dawn in her earliness rose with her rose-colored fingers,
then I proceeded along the shore of the wide-wayed sea there,
earnestly praying to gods, and I brought three men of my comrades,
all whom I trusted the most in every variety of venture.

Meanwhile under the wide-curving bosom of ocean she entered,
bringing four sealskins up from the depth of the sea to the surface,
newly stripped off, and against her father she plotted an ambush.

Beds she had hollowed for us in the sand at the edge of the sea-way,
where she awaited our coming;

and close at her side we assembled.

Down she arranged us in order and threw one skin upon each man.

There the ambush would prove most cruel and difficult to us:

terribly wearied we were by the death-dealing stench of the sea seals.

Who would choose to lie down by a monster engendered in ocean?

Yet she herself brought rescue and furnished abundant assistance,
placing ambrosia under the nose of each man in the ambush,
breathing sweetness that mastered the terrible stench of the creatures.

All of the morning we waited there with enduring and strong hearts.

Out of the water the seals in a crowd came together, and afterward
down in their order they lay on the surf-beaten strand of the sea-way.

Out of the sea at noon the ancient arrived and discovered
all of his well-fed seals, and he went among all and he counted.

First he included us there in his count of the beasts, while his spirit
never suspected deception;