Yet with the strength of his hands Odysseus closed up his mouth and
held him unyieldingly so, and he rescued the whole of the war host,
holding him till the goddess Athena conducted you elsewhere.”
Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:

“Lord Menelaus, Atreus’ son, Zeus-nurtured commander,
greater the grief, for none of these deeds kept away bitter death-doom,
not if the heart in the depth of his bosom were fashioned of iron.

Come now, send us away to our beds, so at last we may settle
down in repose and delight in the sweetness of sleep there together.”
Thus he spoke, and Helen of Argos commanded the slave women
under the porch to set out the bedsteads and lay on their surfaces
beautiful purple blankets, and rugs to be spread there above them,
fleecy wool cloaks on top of them all for the sleepers’ protection.

Out from the hall they went with the fire-blazing torches they carried,
making the beds, while the herald conducted the strangers before him.

There in the forecourt both of the traveling heroes reposed then,
young Telemachus and the glorious offspring of Nestor.

Atreus’ son lay down in the inward room of the high house;

close by his side long-robed Helen, most radiant of women.

When Dawn in her earliness rose with her rose-colored fingers,
then Menelaus renowned for the war cry rose from his bedstead,
put on his clothing, and slung the sharp-edged sword round his shoulder,
under his glittering feet bound the beautiful sandals securely,
out of the chamber emerging in bodily form like a godhead.

Close by Telemachus then he sat and addressed him by name there:

“What kind of need has conducted you here, O hero Telemachus,
into the shining Lacedaemon over the broad back of ocean?

Is it a public affair or a private?

Reveal the truth plainly.”
Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:

“Lord Menelaus, Atreus’ son, Zeus-nurtured commander,
I have arrived in the hope you may tell me a word of my father.

Men consume my household, and all my abundant fields are destroyed now;

hostile men have crowded the house, and continually slaughter
all my abundant sheep and my lumbering crooked-horned cattle—
suitors who court my mother in overbearing transgression.

Therefore I come to your knees in the hope you consent to inform me,
telling the bitter death that he met, whether you were an eyewitness,
or from the speech of another unfortunate wanderer heard it.

More than all others his mother gave birth to the man for affliction.

Do not diminish the story from pity or courtesy toward me;

tell me in full every sight that your own eyes encountered before you.

Hear my entreaty:

if ever my excellent father Odysseus
promised a word or an action to you and fulfilled what he promised
there in the country of Troy, where Achaeans endured their afflictions,
call it to mind for me now, and reveal the infallible true word.”
Deeply indignant, the fair-haired lord Menelaus addressed him:

“Shame!

In the bed of a steadfast and strong-hearted man they are wishing
all to lie down, those spineless and altogether cowardly creatures!

Just as a deer puts her newborn fawns, still unweaned and reclining,
into the lair in the thicket of some overpowering lion,
then on the foothills and grassy ravines goes seeking her pasture,
grazing abroad;

and the lion returns to the place of his bedding,
bringing a destiny ugly and cruel to each of the young ones—
such an abhorrent doom shall Odysseus bring on those people.