There every man understands the healer’s art over all the
rest of mankind, for those people spring from the lineage of Paeeon.

After she cast in the drug and commanded the wine to be poured out,
once more taking the thread, she spoke and addressed the assembly:

“Lord Menelaus, Atreus’ son who was nurtured by great Zeus—and you,
sons of courageous men:

Zeus gives to one and another
evil and good in their turn, for he holds the power to do all.

Therefore now remain in the halls and delight in the banquet,
taking your joy in the stories, while I shall relate one befitting.

All I could never recount or enumerate fully before you—
all of the trials of steadfast and long-suffering lord Odysseus.

Yet I shall tell you one thing that the mighty man dared and accomplished
there in the country of Troy, where Achaeans endured their afflictions.

He gave his body and shoulders disfiguring blows for concealment;

over his shoulders he threw a contemptible rag, like a house slave,
entering into the broad-wayed city that belonged to his foemen.

There he concealed himself in the form of a different person,
taking the shape of a beggar, though such was he never by our ships.

So he went into the city of Troy, and they all were deceived there;

only I knew who he was and perceived through the likeness he carried.

I put him questions, but he in his cunning continually shunned me.

Yet when at last I had bathed him and rubbed his body with olive oil,
put the clothes on his body, and sworn a powerful oath there,
never to name Odysseus or reveal him among the Trojans
till he had come to the swift-running ships and Achaean encampment,
then he disclosed every plan the Achaean people were forming.

Many the Trojans he killed with the long-edged bronze on his passage
back to the Argive encampment, bringing abundant intelligence.

All of the other women of Troy gave shrill lamentation;

joy filled the heart in my bosom, for already it turned to the homeward
journey, and late I regretted the madness the goddess Aphrodite
gave when she led me away to that place from the land of my fathers,
leaving my child and the bridal chamber and husband behind me,
one who was lacking in neither his mind nor his bodily beauty.”
Then in reply fair-haired Menelaus addressed Helen, saying:

“Wife, you have given the whole of the story with fitting proportion.

Many the minds and the counsels of warlike men I have studied,
wandering also across an abundance of earth in my lifetime;

never, however, did these two eyes of mine look on another
heart such as steadfast and long-suffering lord Odysseus carried.

Hear now another deed that the mighty man dared and accomplished,
done in the polished wooden horse where the best of the Argives
all were concealed, bearing slaughter and death to the people of Troyland.

Then you approached us—a god must have moved you to make the endeavor,
one who desired to give the Trojans the glory of triumph—
while in your steps followed godlike Deiphobus closely.

Three times around the hollow ambush you circled and stroked it,
calling aloud by their names the most excellent men of the Danaans,
copying perfectly there the voice of each Argive’s consort.

Tydeus’ son and I and the noble and steadfast Odysseus,
sitting among all the others, heard clearly whenever you called us.

Both of us sprang with desire either then to arise and go outward,
or to reply to you straightway and answer your voice from the inside.

Yet Odysseus restrained us and checked our desire as we struggled.

Then all the other sons of the host of Achaeans were silent;

only Anticlus continued determined to give you an answer.