The lord Menelaus observed and considered,
pondering there in the inward depth of his mind and his spirit
whether to let him speak first and name his own father before them,
or to inquire for himself and examine the whole thing in detail.

While in the depth of his mind and his spirit he turned these reflections,
out from her high-roofed fragrant chamber the lady Helen
came, in appearance resembling the gold-distaff goddess Artemis.

Adreste came at her side and arranged a beautiful armchair;

Alcippe carried a rug that was woven of soft-colored fleeces;

Phylo was carrying forth her basket constructed of silver,
gift of Alcandre, the wife of the lord Polybus, dwelling
there in Egyptian Thebes, where houses possess greatest riches.

Two silver bathtubs Polybus gave to the lord Menelaus,
also a pair of tripods and ten whole talents of gold-work.

Apart from these gifts, the wife of Polybus gave Helen fair presents,
giving a distaff of gold and a basket provided with wheels there,
fashioned of silver with rims that were finished in glittering gold-work.

This was the basket her serving maid Phylo brought out and placed by her,
filled with the yarn from the spindle;

and over its uppermost surface
lay the distaff, surrounded with wool of a violet darkness.

Down in her chair she sat, with a footstool under her two feet;

straightway she asked of her husband about everything that concerned her:

“Do we already know, Menelaus, O nurtured of great Zeus,
who these men claim themselves to be, who have entered our household?

Shall I conceal the truth, or speak it?

My heart tells me to speak it.

Never before, I declare, have I seen such a marvelous likeness,
neither in woman nor man—I am seized with astonishment, looking—
just as this young man resembles the son of great-hearted Odysseus,
young Telemachus, left as a newborn child in the household
when for the sake of my shameless face you Achaeans assembled,
coming to Troy with audacious war in the depth of your spirits.”
Then in reply fair-haired Menelaus addressed Helen, saying:

“Wife, I perceive it as well, just as you have likened and judged him.

Those are the feet of Odysseus, these are his hands in appearance,
such is the glance of his eyes, and the head and the hair that surrounds it.

Just now, as I called Odysseus back to my own recollection,
I was recounting the measure of all he endured and accomplished
there for my sake, while this young man let fall a bitter tear downward,
holding the purple-colored mantle in front of his two eyes.”
Then Peisistratus, Nestor’s glorious son, gave him answer:

“Lord Menelaus, Atreus’ son, Zeus-nurtured commander,
this is indeed the son of that man, exactly as you say.

Yet he is modest in spirit;

the heart in his bosom is bashful,
shrinking from pouring an arrogant torrent of words on arrival
here in your presence, whose voice gives joy to us both like a god’s voice.

Nestor, Gerenian horseman and ruler, sent me to join him,
coming along as his escort;

for this man desired to behold you,
hoping that you might advise him in some form of word or endeavor.

Many the woes that a son must endure in the house of his father
when he is gone, and no other defenders are standing beside him;

so with Telemachus now:

his father is gone, and no others
live in the country to shield him and beat his afflictions away there.”
Then in reply fair-haired Menelaus addressed them, saying:

“Wonderful!

Truly the son of a well-beloved man has entered
into my house, whose father endured many trials for my sake.

I used to say I would welcome him over all other Achaeans
if wide-thundering Zeus on Olympus had granted the two of us
safe homecoming over the sea in our own swift ships from the conflict.