and then he lay down there among them.

Shouting aloud, we rushed him at once and surrounded his body
there with our arms;

but the ancient remembered his difficult cunning.

First he became a tremendous lion with beautiful mane there,
then a tremendous serpent, a leopard, a mountain-sized boar there;

then he became running water and then a high tree full of foliage.

Still we held firm with unshakable grip and enduring spirits.

Yet when at last the old god had grown tired of all his devices,
then he began to inquire of me there and address me directly:

‘Which of the gods devised this counsel with you, son born of Atreus,
so you could ambush and hold me against my desire?

What need moves you?’
Thus did he speak, and at once I replied and addressed him in answer:

‘Ancient, you know;

why put me a sideways question about it?

Long I have now been held on the island, unable to discover
any escape, while the heart in the depth of my bosom is dwindling.

Tell me, however—for gods understand everything that is hidden—
which of the deathless immortals has shackled me here and obstructed
all my return, and how I may sail over the fish-thronging sea-way.’
Thus did I speak, and immediately he gave me this answer:

‘You should have offered to Zeus and the other immortals fine victims
ere you embarked, so that quickly you might reach the land of your fathers,
sailing your ship on the surface of ocean’s wine-colored water.

It is not destined for you to behold your friends and arrive at
home with its strong-built walls and the country and land of your fathers,
till once again you have entered the water of Egypt and traveled
up that heaven-descended river and offered holy hecatombs
there to the gods everlasting who govern the breadth of the heavens.

Then shall the gods give the road that your heart has desired to travel.’
Thus did he speak, and the heart in the depth of my bosom was broken,
since he had sent me again on the mist-covered sea-way to Egypt,
making me travel once more on the long and the difficult roadway.

Still I addressed him and spoke out a word in reply to his counsel:

‘Ancient, I shall accomplish it all in the way you command me.

Come now, reveal to me this, and reveal the whole truth in your answer:

did all Achaeans return in their ships without harm to their homelands,
all whom Nestor and I left behind when we sailed out from Troyland?

Or did one suffer a bitter death in the hull of his vessel,
or in the arms of his friends when he wound the war to completion?’
Thus did I speak, and immediately he gave me this answer:

‘Atreus’ son, why question me this?

You have no necessity
either to know or discover my mind;

and I say you shall not long
keep yourself free from tears when the whole of the story has reached you.

Many were slaughtered, and many remained;

but only two leaders
died among bronze-armored chiefs of Achaeans upon the return road;

you were yourself a witness of battle;

but one man is living,
held in a place far away on the breadth of the measureless sea-way.

Ajax was shattered and lost by his long-oared vessels forever.

First, great Poseidon impelled him against the tremendous Gyraean
rocks, but he rescued him even then from the sea and destruction.

He would have fled from the doom, although he was hated by Pallas,
had he not hurled out an arrogant word in the depth of his blindness,
saying that, spite of the gods, he escaped from the great gulf of ocean.

Lordly Poseidon heard as he shouted his arrogant boasting;

straightway he took in his powerful hands the three-pronged trident,
struck the Gyraean rock, and he split it apart in the middle.

Part of it stood in its place, while the part that was broken fell seaward,
that very piece where Ajax sat when his mind was enormously blinded;