Into the hollow Lacedaemon, land of the gorges, they entered,
driving their horses ahead to the house of the lord Menelaus.

There they discovered the king giving a wedding feast to his kinsmen,
honoring both his irreproachable daughter and son in the household.

Her he was sending away to the son of Achilles, the breaker
of battle lines;

for at Troy he had promised and nodded agreement
she should be his, and the gods now brought the betrothal to fullness.

Therefore with horses and chariots now he was sending her outward,
bound for the famous city and land of the lordly Myrmidons.

For his own son he was bringing the daughter of Alector from Sparta—
Megapenthes, his well-beloved son, born in the height of
manhood to him by a slave;

for the gods gave Helen no further
child after first she had borne him a daughter of radiant beauty,
Hermione, radiant and beautiful as golden Aphrodite.

Thus through the great high-roofed halls they feasted together,
neighbors and kinsmen gathered around the renowned Menelaus,
taking delight;

in their midst a singer resembling immortals
sang to the lyre, while two of the tumblers among the assembly,
keeping the time of the music, spun and revolved through the center.

There at the gateway the two young men drew up and halted,
horses beside them— Telemachus and Nestor’s glorious son there.

Eteoneus the hero came from the doorway and saw them,
diligent servant attending the famous and lordly Menelaus;

into the house he went bearing word to the shepherd of peoples.

Standing beside him, he spoke, and his words took wing as he uttered:

“Two unfamiliar men have arrived, Menelaus, Zeus-nurtured;

both in appearance resemble the lineage descended from great Zeus.

Tell me whether we now should unyoke their swift-footed horses,
or send them onward to somebody else who will kindly receive them.”
Deeply indignant, the fair-haired lord Menelaus addressed him:

“Never before were you foolish, Eteoneus, son born of Boethous;

now you are babbling empty and childish words in your folly.

Surely the two of us ate abundant bread at strangers’ tables,
coming here homeward, in hope that at last great Zeus might release us
out of our misery.

Hurry and loose the strangers’ horses,
then lead the visitors into the house to partake of the banquet.”
Thus he spoke;

and the servant dashed through the hall, and he summoned
all of the other diligent servants to follow behind him.

Under the yoke they loosened the sweating and hard-driven horses,
tethered them there by the mangers, the feeding troughs of the horses,
gave them the grain of the spelt with the white-colored barley commingled,
then tipped the chariot shaft toward the gleaming wall of the entrance,
leading the strangers themselves to the godlike house;

and they marveled,
gazing around at the house of the king who was nurtured by great Zeus.

Such was the splendor, as though of the sun or the moon in its shining,
filling the high-roofed house of the famous and lordly Menelaus.

When their eyes found delight in the sight of the glittering riches,
into the polished bathtubs they stepped and refreshed themselves bathing.

After the slave women bathed them and richly anointed with olive oil,
throwing around them the fleecy wool cloaks and the tunics beneath them,
there on the chairs they sat down beside Menelaus, son born of Atreus.

Water for washing a servant brought in a beautiful pitcher
fashioned of gold, and she poured it above the silver basin,
letting them wash, then drew up a polished table beside them.

Bread the respected woman who managed the household brought them,
setting before them abundant provisions and giving them freely.

Platters of every variety of meat the carver uplifted,
set there before them, and placed the golden cups there beside them.