Thus they continued to labor and ready the feast in the household.

Meanwhile suitors assembled in front of Odysseus’ palace,
taking delight in the discus and casting their javelins outward,
there on the leveled ground where they always were playing, insolent.

There sat Antinous, also the godlike lord Eurymachus,
leaders of suitors and greatly surpassing the rest in their prowess.

Noemon, Phronius’ son, approached and stood before them,
asking Antinous there and addressing him openly with questions:

“Tell me, Antinous, whether we know or do not know
when young Telemachus comes from the sandy country of Pylos.

Taking my ship he departed, and I have a need for the vessel,
meaning to cross to the broad dance grounds of Elis, where twelve young
mares I possess with their sturdy mule foals nursing beneath them,
still unbroken, and one I would drive from the herd and then break him.”
Thus he spoke;

and they marveled in heart, for they never imagined
he had proceeded to Neleian Pylos;

instead he was somewhere
close in the fields with the flocks or beside the keeper of swine there.

Then in reply spoke Antinous, son of Eupeithes:

“Tell me the truth of the matter:

what day did he leave, and what young men
went at his side?

Were they chosen Ithacans, or were they his own hired
servants and slaves?

He could manage even this kind of venture.

Tell me this also truly, that I may understand clearly:

did he take off with the black-hulled ship by force and unwilling
leave you, or freely did you give it because his fair words had persuaded?”
Then Noemon, the son of Phronius, gave him his answer:

“Freely I gave it myself.

What else could another man have done
when such a man, with such cares weighing heavily down on his spirit,
asked him?

It would have been difficult surely to withhold the favor.

All of the young men who followed are best in the whole of the country
after ourselves;

and I saw their leader embark on the vessel,
Mentor—or else it was godhead exactly resembling Mentor.

Yet this fills me with wonder:

I saw noble Mentor here only
yesterday early at dawn, though he boarded the vessel for Pylos.”
Thus having spoken, he went to the house of his father and left them.

Both men’s insolent hearts were stunned with the news that he gave them.

There in a body they seated the suitors and stopped all the contests.

Then Antinous, son of Eupeithes, addressed the assembly,
furious, while in the depth of his heart black anger was brimming,
filling him greatly with wrath, and his eyes were like blazing firelight:

“Curse it!

A terrible deed has been arrogantly accomplished,
this expedition of young Telemachus;

we said it would fail him.

Simply in spite of the whole of us one mere boy has departed,
hauling a ship to the sea and selecting the best in the country.

Soon he shall be our beginning of evil.

May Zeus end his power
ere he attains to the measure of manhood and strength of his lifetime!

Come then, give me a swift-running ship and companions of twenty,
so I may watch for and ambush the man on the course of his homeward
passage between the rugged land Samos and Ithaca’s country.

Thus may his sailing in search of his father end bitter and costly.”
Thus he spoke, and they all gave approval and urged the endeavor.

Straightway rising, they entered the house of the lord Odysseus.

Nor did Penelope long remain unaware of the secret
purpose the suitors devised and were weaving in depth of their spirits.

Medon the herald informed her, for he had heard all of their counsels,
standing outside of the court while within they were weaving the ambush.

Into the house he went bearing word to the lady Penelope.

Just as he crossed the threshold, Penelope asked him directly: