down it conveyed him into the endless and turbulent sea depth.

There he died after drinking his fill of the salt-colored water.

Somehow your brother escaped and avoided the fates of destruction,
traveling safe in his hollow-built ships, for the lady Hera preserved him.

Yet when he nearly had come to the lofty and steep-sided summit
there at Malea, a tempestuous wind snatched him suddenly upward,
carried him heavily groaning across the fish-thronging sea-way,
onto the furthest border of country where Thyestes once had
made his dwelling, and now his own son Aegisthus was living.

Yet from that place safe homecoming also at last was revealed him;

gods turned the wind to an excellent course, and at home they arrived then.

Gladly he placed both his feet on the land of his fathers and kissed it,
clasping his country, while many a hot tear streamed from his eyelids,
such was the joy in his heart to behold his own country before him.

Yet from a high place the watchman who guarded the country perceived him,
he whom Aegisthus, the crooked deviser, positioned as watchman,
promising two full talents of gold as his wages;

a whole year
there he had watched, lest the king pass by and remember his war strength.

Carrying news to the house, he reported to the shepherd of peoples.

Straightway Aegisthus devised a treacherous scheme in his bosom:

picking the twenty best of the men he possessed in the country,
setting an ambush, and ordering there in the hall a feast readied.

Then with his horses and chariots went to invite Agamemnon,
shepherd of peoples, while harboring unspeakable purpose within him.

Leading him up unaware of his death, he killed him at dinner,
just as a man at the manger cuts down an ox for the slaughter.

Not one companion of Atreus’ son who had followed remained there,
nor one man of Aegisthus;

they all were cut down in the palace.’
Thus did he speak, and the heart in the depth of my bosom was broken.

Sitting in sand I wept, and the heart in my bosom no longer
wished to continue to live or to look on the bright light of Helios.

Yet when at last I was sated with weeping and writhing in sorrow,
then the infallible Ancient of Ocean addressed me and told me:

‘Atreus’ son, no longer continue this rigid and ceaseless
weeping, for never shall any remedy come of it.

Rather,
quickly devise how again you may come to the land of your fathers.

Either you still shall discover Aegisthus living, or noble
Orestes already has killed him, and you may arrive for the burial.’
Thus did he speak;

and the heart and the resolute spirit within me,
even although I was grieved, grew warm once again in my bosom.

Raising my voice, I addressed him, and these words took wing as I uttered:

‘Now I have learned of these men, but name me the third in the story,
that one alive and still held back on the broad sea’s surface,
or one dead;

though grieving, I still have desire to hear of him.’
Thus did I speak, and immediately he gave me this answer:

‘Laertes’ son, whose house is established in Ithaca’s country.

Him I beheld on an island, letting the great tears fall downward,
there in the halls of Calypso the nymph, who continues to hold him
forcibly there, and he cannot return to the land of his fathers,
since no ships with their oars are beside him and no companions
able to carry him over the broad and enormous back of the sea-way.

Yet for yourself, Menelaus, O Zeus-descended, it is not
fated for death to arrive in horse-pasturing Argos and take you.

Gods everlasting instead shall convey you to Elysian country,
there at the earth’s end where the fair-haired lord Rhadamanthus is living,
there where the easiest life is provided for all human beings.

Snow never comes, no tempestuous winter and never the rainfall;