“Herald, why have the arrogant suitors dispatched you to find me?

Is it to tell all the slave women serving the lordly Odysseus
they must abandon their tasks and prepare the men’s feast in the household?

May they no longer be suitors or gather again in the future;

may this meal be the last they consume in this place all together,
those who continually swarm here and shear away all of the livelihood,
all the possessions belonging to thoughtful and steadfast Telemachus!

Did you not hear in the years long ago, when you still were but children,
what kind of man among all of your fathers the lord Odysseus
was, never doing a deed beyond measure or speaking unjustly
there in the country, although this is often the custom of godlike
kings:

they may hate one mortal and love one mortal in turn there.

Never, however, did he commit violence against any person.

Now your own hearts have been shown and the ugliness of your endeavors:

afterward no gratitude lives for the good that a man has accomplished.”
Medon the herald, a man of intelligence, gave her his answer:

“Would that this evil, my queen, were the worst that the suitors intended!

Something much greater and harder to bear they are plotting among them;

may Cronos’ son never bring it to pass and fulfill their intention.

They are determined to kill Telemachus there with the sharp bronze
during his homeward journey;

he sailed out in search of his father,
going to sacred Pylos and shining Lacedaemon.”
Thus he spoke, and her knees and the heart in her body were loosened;

long she was gripped by a speechlessness holding the words she would utter.

Tears filled her eyes, and the flower of the voice in her throat was arrested.

Yet in the end she found words and addressed him in answer, inquiring:

“Herald, why has my child departed?

There was no necessity
he should embark on the fast-running ships that serve human beings
there as the horses of ocean and cross the great waters of sea-way.

Is it intended that not even his name shall be left among mortals?”
Medon the herald, a man of intelligence, gave her his answer:

“I do not know if some god aroused him, or whether his own heart
drove him to Pylos, that there he might learn and discover his father’s
homeward return, or else what destiny finally met him.”
Thus having spoken, he went through the house of the lord Odysseus.

Then the pain eating the heart poured around her;

she no longer could bear to
sit any longer, though chairs stood abundant throughout the household;

down on the threshold she sank by the richly constructed bedchamber,
pitifully moaning;

and all of the slave women whimpered around her,
every one living within the household, both younger and older.

Sobbing intensely, Penelope spoke to the women around her:

“Listen, beloved women;

Olympian Zeus has allotted
sorrows to me above women who grew and were born in my lifetime.

Long ago I lost my noble and lion-hearted husband,
graced among all of the Danaans with every form of excellence,
that noble man whose glory spreads over Hellas and Argos.

Now once more have the tempest winds snatched my beloved son from me,
out of the halls without glory, and never I heard his departure.

Cruel-hearted women!

Not one of you even considered
waking me out of my bed, though you understood perfectly clearly
when he went down to the hollow black vessel awaiting his coming.

Had I discovered that he was considering such an expedition,
either he would have remained, though he greatly desired the journey,
or he would have left me behind in the halls after death overtook me.