Just as a lion turns in the midst of a crowd of the huntsmen,
terrified as they insidiously close their circle around him,
so she was turning in thought when the depth of the sleep came upon her.

Backward she leaned and slept, and the whole of her body was loosened.

Then the gray-eyed goddess Athena devised a new counsel.

Making a phantom, she fashioned its body resembling a woman,
Iphthime, daughter of great-hearted lord Icarius,
wedded to Eumelus, who made his home in the country of Pherae.

This she dispatched to the house of the godlike hero Odysseus,
so it might bring to Penelope, weeping and making lamentation,
respite from sorrowful tears and the pain of her mourning and weeping.

Into the chamber it came by the strap that secured the door bolt there,
stood at the head of her bed and addressed her and gave her instruction:

“Do you sleep, Penelope, while the heart in your body is grieving?

No, the gods everlasting who live without trouble shall never
let you lament and be anguished, for still your son has a homeward
journey;

he has committed no sin in the sight of immortals.”
Then the attentive Penelope gave the phantom an answer,
sleeping exceedingly sweet at the shadowy gateway of dreamland:

“Why have you come to me now, dear sister?

You never before were
accustomed to visit, because you live very far from my household.

Yet you command me to cease from my misery, also the many
sorrows that swarm in the depth of my mind and my heart without ceasing.

Long ago I lost my noble and lion-hearted husband,
graced among all of the Danaans with every form of excellence,
that noble man whose glory spreads over Hellas and Argos.

Now once more my beloved son has departed in hollow-built vessel,
only a boy, unpracticed in labor and councils of manhood.

Therefore I mourn for the young man even more deeply than that one;

trembling for him and fearing lest something befall him and hurt him,
whether among the men of the land where he went or at sea there.

Many the enemies plotting against him and longing to kill him,
ere he returns once again to the land and the home of his fathers.”
Then the shadowy phantom replied to her words and addressed her:

“Take heart now, and do not excessively fear in your spirit.

Such an attendant goes by his side as all other men have
prayed might be standing beside them, for she has power to protect him—
Pallas Athena, who pities your mourning and all your affliction;

she is the one who has sent me to tell you the truth of this matter.”
Then the attentive Penelope answered the phantom and told it:

“If you are truly a god and have heard a divinity’s true voice,
come then, reveal to me also the man so greatly afflicted:

whether he still lives somewhere and looks on the light of the sun there,
or he is dead and already has gone to the household of Hades.”
Then the shadowy phantom replied to her words and addressed her:

“Of that man I shall not reveal to you all of the story,
whether he lives or is dead, for it is evil to speak empty language.”
Thus having spoken, it slipped by the bolt at the post of the doorway,
into the breath of the winds;

and the daughter of lord Icarius
started awake from her sleep, and the heart in her bosom was warmed then,
such was the vividness there of the dream in the dark of the nighttime.

Meanwhile suitors had boarded and sailed on the watery pathways,
turning the sheer murder of young Telemachus over within them.

There is a rocky island that lies in the middle of ocean,
midway between the rugged land Samos and Ithaca’s country,
Asteris, not very large, but it holds twin harbors upon it,
both fit for ships to lie hidden.

Achaeans awaited in ambush.