Come then, let one of you run and summon the old man Dolius,
slave my father presented to me when I came to the household,
he who attends to my orchard of many trees, so that swiftly
he may sit down by Laertes and tell him the whole of the story.

Maybe Laertes shall weave some counsel in depth of his bosom,
coming before all the people to weep and implore them, who purpose
utterly ruining both his own line and the line of Odysseus.”
Then Eurycleia, the well-loved nurse, gave answer and told her:

“Beloved child, either kill me with bronze that is pitiless, or else
leave me alive in the house, but I shall not hide from you longer.

All this I knew, and I gave him whatever provisions he ordered,
bread and the honey-sweet wine;

but he made me swear a tremendous
oath not to tell you the truth till the twelfth day came in its season,
or you yourself missed him and learned that the young man departed,
lest with your weeping you mar the beautiful skin of your body.

Now you must bathe and put fresh clothing around your body,
then with the slave women serving you go to the room at the rooftop,
pray to Athena, the daughter of Zeus who possesses the aegis.

She still may save him, even if death has already surrounded.

Do not afflict with more sorrow an old man already in sorrow.

I do not think that the gods everlasting entirely hate the
line of Arceisius’ son;

one man shall survive who possesses
both the high-roofed house and the fertile and far-spreading farmland.”
Thus did she speak, lulled the grief, and restrained both her eyelids from weeping.

Then Penelope bathed and put fresh clothing around her body,
went with the slave women serving her up to the room at the rooftop,
setting the barley grains in a basket and praying Athena:

“Hear me, Unwearying daughter of Zeus who possesses the aegis!

If the Odysseus of manifold counsels within this household
ever burned fatty thighbones for you from an ox or a sheep here,
call them to mind for me now, and preserve my beloved son safely;

beat the oppressive and wickedly arrogant suitors away now.”
Thus did she cry, and the goddess Athena attended her prayer.

Meanwhile suitors made clamor throughout all the shadowy chambers,
and one of the arrogant younger men spoke to another:

“Surely the queen who is courted by many prepares for a marriage
here with one of us, knowing no part of the death of her son there.”
So they would speak, knowing nothing of what was prepared in the darkness.

Then Antinous addressed them all in the midst of assembly:

“Fools, you must keep altogether away from all arrogant speeches,
lest somebody carry the word to the queen who remains in the inside.

Come, let us silently rise and bring to accomplishment quickly
that same plan which delighted the heart in the bosom of each man.”
Thus he spoke and selected the twenty best men among them.

Down to the swift-running ship and the sand-covered seashore they hastened.

First of all they dragged down the vessel to deep-colored water,
setting the mast and the sails in the black-colored ship for the passage.

All of the oars they fitted inside of the leather-made oar straps,
all in appropriate order, and spread out the white sail above them.

High-hearted servants carried the weapons and placed them aboard there.

Out in the water they moored her securely and came to the seashore,
ate their supper together and waited for evening to reach them.

Yet in the upper room the attentive Penelope rested,
fasting there and tasting no food and no drink for her comfort,
turning in mind whether her irreproachable son should evade death,
or be destroyed by the overbearing and arrogant suitors.