Fair-haired Menelaus welcomed the two with a gesture and told them:

“Take now the food and be welcome;

and afterward, when you have tasted
supper together, we then shall ask what manner of men you
are;

for the lineage born of your parents is not lost within you.

You are descended from scepter-bearing rulers, the Zeus-born;

never could ordinary people engender such sons as I see here.”
Thus he spoke, and he lifted the fat-rich chine of the roasted ox there,
setting it down before them, the portion of honor they gave him.

Both reached their hands to the excellent food that was ready before them.

Then, when desire for food and for drinking was put from their bodies,
thoughtful Telemachus spoke to the glorious offspring of Nestor,
leaning his head there close, so the others would never overhear him:

“Look here, O son born of Nestor, delight of the heart in my bosom,
look at the flash of the bronze through the house and its echoing chambers,
gold and electrum together, and silver and ivory shining!

Such is the inward court of Olympian Zeus, I imagine,
holding such measureless wealth;

I am seized with astonishment, looking.”
Fair-haired Menelaus heard and attended the words he was speaking;

raising his voice to the two, he spoke, and his words took wing outward:

“Dear children, none among mortals may enter a contest with great Zeus,
deathless forever his halls and the wealth he possesses within them.

Yet among men there may be one to rival my wealth, or be no one.

Much have I suffered and far have I wandered to carry it homeward,
borne in my ships;

and the eighth revolving year saw my coming.

Wandering Cyprus, Phoenicia, and Egypt with all of its people,
Ethiopians, Sidonian folk, and Erembians I visited,
Libya too, where lambs from the moment of birth have their horn tips,
since in the completed circle of each year sheep bear their young thrice.

There neither lord nor the man who is shepherd is ever found lacking
cheese for his table, or meat, or the sweetness of milk for his drinking;

always the flocks throughout the year give milk for the milking.

Yet while I wandered in foreign lands and was gathering riches,
somebody murdered my brother meanwhile in secrecy, taking
him unaware through the treacherous fraud of his murderous consort.

Therefore no joy do I take in the mastery of these possessions.

All this surely you heard from your fathers, whoever they may be;

greatly I suffered, and lost altogether a flourishing household,
pleasantly furnished and holding abundant and excellent treasure.

Would I were living here now with only a third of the riches,
were those men still alive who died in the years before Troyland,
there in the broad Trojan plain, far away from horse-pasturing Argos!

Yet although I mourn all those men and continually grieve them,
often as here in the halls of the palace I sit in remembrance—
now I delight my heart with weeping, and now I abandon
sorrow, for quickly a man is sated with chill lamentation—
still, for all men together I mourn not so much, though I sorrow,
as for that one man, who makes sleep hateful before me,
makes food hateful, whenever I think;

for no other Achaean
labored as much as Odysseus labored and suffered;

and all his
portion was sorrow, while mine is a grief that cannot be forgotten,
since he is gone such a long time, and we know nothing about him,
whether he lives or is dead.

Surely all of his loved ones are mourning:

aged Laertes and steadfast Penelope, also the young man
Telemachus, whom as a newborn child he abandoned at home there.”
Thus he spoke and awakened in him a longing to mourn for his father.

Tears from his eyelids fell to the ground when he heard of his father;

up to his eyes with both hands lifting his purple-colored
mantle, he hid them.