Father Zeus and Athena and Phoebus Apollo, if only
such as he once was in strongly built Lesbos, the lord Odysseus,
rose to the wrestling challenge and grappled with Philomeleides,
hurled him down with tremendous force, while Achaeans rejoiced there—
let that Odysseus come on the suitors in such an appearance!

Swift would the death be for all, and the marriage exceedingly bitter.

Yet for the thing you inquire of me and beseech me to answer,
I shall not swerve from the truth with evasive narration or trick you.

All the infallible Ancient of Ocean declared and revealed to me,
not one word shall I hide from you now or conceal in my bosom.

There in the land of Egypt the gods still held me away from my homeward
though I desired it, since I did not offer completed hecatombs.

Gods ever wish that their full commandments be kept in remembrance.

There is an island that lies in the great sea’s turbulent waters,
there at the mouth of Egyptian lands, and they call it the island
Pharos, as far from the shore as a hollow-built vessel may travel
all of a day when a whistling wind blows loudly behind her.

There is a harbor upon it with anchorage excellent, whence men
launch their symmetrical vessels to sea after drawing the black water.

There for a period twenty days the gods held me;

and never
blew an appropriate wind that could carry a ship on its journey
over the broad and enormous back of the fish-thronging sea-way.

All our provisions by then would have failed, and the strength of the shipmen,
had not a goddess taken compassion and rescued me from it:

daughter of Proteus, powerful Ancient of Ocean, the lady
Eidothea, whose heart I had moved more deeply than others.

She encountered me wandering there far apart from my comrades,
who continually roved round the island and fished for their dinner,
bending their hooks, since hunger was pinching the depth of their bellies.

Standing beside me, the goddess addressed me and gave me instruction:

‘Are you a fool, stranger, and excessively slow of perception,
or do you choose to be slack and delight in the pain you are suffering?

Long have you now been held on the island, unable to discover
any escape, while the hearts of your comrades are dwindling within them.’
Thus did she speak, and at once I replied and addressed her in answer:

‘I shall declare it to you, whoever you are among goddesses:

not by my free inclination am I being held on the island.

Surely I sinned against the immortals who govern broad heaven.

Tell me, however—for gods understand everything that is hidden—
which of the deathless immortals has shackled me here and obstructed
all my return, and how I may sail over the fish-thronging sea-way.’
Thus did I speak, and the radiant goddess at once gave me answer:

‘Then I shall tell you, O stranger, and all that I tell shall be truthful.

Here there is dwelling a deathless, infallible Ancient of Ocean,
Proteus out of Egyptian waters, who knows every ocean
depth, and he serves the earth-shaking lord Poseidon beneath him.

People declare he is father to me and the one who engendered me.

If you by any device could ambush the god and secure him,
he would reveal to you both the road and the length of the journey,
also your homecoming, how you may sail over fish-thronging sea-way.

He would reveal to you also, O Zeus-descended, if you ask him,
all that was done in your house, whether evil or good in its outcome,
while you were gone on your lengthy and difficult road of returning.’
Thus did she speak, and at once I replied and addressed her in answer:

‘You must devise the ambush yourself for the ancient immortal,
lest he perceive me before I can seize him or know and escape me.