Draw close to it there, hero, as I command you,
and dig a pit about a cubit's measure this way and that,
and around it pour a drink-offering to all the dead —
first with milk and honey mingled, then with sweet wine,
the third time with water;

and sprinkle white barley over it.

And entreat, over and over, the strengthless heads of the dead:

vow that, come to Ithaca, you will offer in your halls
a barren heifer, your best, and heap the pyre with good things;

and to Tiresias, apart, alone, you will sacrifice a ram
all black, the one that stands out from all your flocks.

Then, when with prayers you have entreated the glorious tribes of the dead,
sacrifice a ram and a black ewe,
bending their heads toward Erebus — but turn yourself away,
facing the river's streams.

And there will come, in crowds,
the souls of the dead who are gone.

Then rouse your companions, and command them
to flay the sheep that lie there slaughtered by the pitiless bronze,
and burn them, and pray to the gods —
to mighty Hades and dread Persephone.

And you:

draw the sharp sword from beside your thigh
and sit, and do not let the strengthless heads of the dead
come near the blood before you question Tiresias.

And quickly then the seer will come, leader of peoples,
and he will tell you the road, and the measures of your journey,
and your homecoming — how you shall go over the fish-filled sea.'
So she spoke;

and at once Dawn of the golden throne came on.

She dressed me then in my clothes, a cloak and a tunic,
and she, the nymph, put on a great silver-shining mantle,
fine-woven and graceful, and cast about her waist a belt,
beautiful, golden, and set a veil on her head above.

And I went through the halls and roused my companions
with gentle words, standing by each man in turn:

'No more lying now, drowsing in sweet sleep.

Let us go:

the lady Circe has shown me the way.'
So I spoke, and their proud hearts consented.

But not even from there could I bring my companions off unharmed.

There was one, Elpenor, the youngest of all —
no great fighter in war, no steady mind on him —
who had lain down apart from his companions in the sacred house of Circe,
heavy with wine, wanting the cool air.

Hearing the noise and stir of his companions moving,
he leapt up all at once — and forgot, in his fuddled wits,
to come back down again by the long ladder;

he fell headlong from the roof, and his neck
snapped from the spine;

and his soul went down to Hades.

And as my men were setting out I spoke among them:

'You think, no doubt, that you are going home, to your own
dear fatherland.

But Circe has marked out another road for us:

to the house of Hades and dread Persephone,
to consult the ghost of Theban Tiresias.'
So I spoke, and their own hearts broke within them:

they sat down right where they were, and wailed, and tore their hair —
but nothing came of all their mourning.

And while we walked to the fast ship and the shore of the sea,
grieving, letting the big tears fall,
Circe meanwhile had gone down, and beside the black ship
had tethered a ram and a black ewe —
slipping past us with ease. Who could see a god
against the god's will, moving here or there?

---