Meanwhile, in her house, Circe had bathed the other companions
with kind care, and rubbed them richly with oil,
and thrown about them fleecy cloaks and tunics,
and we found them all feasting well in the halls.

And when the men saw one another, face to face, and knew each other,
they wept and lamented, and the house rang round them.

And she came close beside me and spoke, shining among goddesses:

'No more of this swelling lament now.

I know it myself —
all you have suffered on the fish-filled sea,
all the harm lawless men have done you on dry land.

Come now:

eat your food, and drink your wine,
until you gather back the spirit in your breasts
that was yours when you first left your fathers' land
of rugged Ithaca.

Now you are withered, spiritless,
forever brooding on the misery of your wandering — your hearts
never in the feast, for truly you have suffered much.'
So she spoke, and our proud hearts consented.

So there, day after day, for the full round of a year,
we sat feasting on meat past counting and sweet wine.

But when the year was out, and the seasons turned in their wheel,
as the months waned and the long days came round,
then my trusted companions called me out, and said:

'You are possessed!

It is time to remember your fatherland —
if it is truly decreed that you be saved, and come
to your high-roofed house and your own fatherland.'
So they spoke, and my proud heart consented.

So then all day long till the setting of the sun
we sat feasting on meat past counting and sweet wine;

and when the sun went down and the dusk came on,
the men lay down to sleep through the shadowy halls,
but I climbed into the surpassingly beautiful bed of Circe
and clasped her knees in supplication;

and the goddess heard my voice.

And lifting my voice I spoke winged words to her:

'Circe — make good now the promise that you made me,
to send me home.

My spirit strains for it already,
and my companions' too:

they wear my heart away,
mourning around me whenever you are elsewhere.'
So I spoke, and she answered at once, shining among goddesses:

'Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus of the many devices:

stay no longer in my house against your will.

But there is another journey you must accomplish first:

you must go down
to the house of Hades and dread Persephone
to consult the ghost of Theban Tiresias,
the blind seer, whose mind stands fast:

to him, even dead, Persephone has granted understanding —
to him alone the power of thought.

The rest flit past as shadows.

So she spoke, and my heart broke within me,
and I wept, sitting there on the bed;

my heart
had no more will to live and see the light of the sun.

But when I had had my fill of weeping and writhing,
then I answered her with words, and said:

'Circe — and who will be pilot on that voyage?

No man ever yet reached Hades in a black ship.'
So I spoke, and she answered at once, shining among goddesses:

'Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus of the many devices:

let no lack of a pilot at the ship concern you.

Set up the mast, spread the white sails open,
and sit:

the breath of the North Wind will carry her.

But when in your ship you have crossed the stream of Ocean,
there is a scrub shore there, and the groves of Persephone —
tall black poplars, and willows that shed their fruit unripened,
Beach the ship there, on Ocean's deep-eddying edge,
and go on yourself into the dank house of Hades.

There into Acheron pour Pyriphlegethon
and Cocytus, which is a branch broken off the water of Styx;

and there is a rock, at the meeting-roar of the two rivers.