She came close beside me and spoke, shining among goddesses:
'Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus of the many devices —
go now to your fast ship and the shore of the sea.
First of all, haul the ship up onto dry land,
and stow your goods and all the tackle in the caves;
then come back yourself, and bring your trusted companions.'
So she spoke, and my proud heart consented.
I went my way to the fast ship and the shore of the sea,
and there by the fast ship I found my trusted companions
in pitiful lamentation, letting the big tears fall.
As when farmyard calves around the herded cows
that come back to the dung-yard, filled with grazing,
all skip and frisk to meet them — the pens no longer
hold them, but lowing without pause they run
around their mothers: so those men, when their eyes took me in,
poured around me weeping. And to their hearts it felt
as if they had come to their fatherland, to their very town
in rugged Ithaca, where they were bred and born.
And wailing, they spoke winged words to me:
'At your return, Zeus-nurtured, we rejoice
as if we had come home to Ithaca, our fathers' land.
But come — tell the destruction of the other companions.'
So they spoke, and I answered with soft words:
'First of all, let us haul the ship up onto dry land,
and stow our goods and all the tackle in the caves;
then bestir yourselves, all of you, and come with me,
so you may see our companions in the sacred halls of Circe,
eating and drinking: what they have never fails.'
So I spoke, and they quickly heeded my words.
Only Eurylochus tried to hold back all my companions,
and lifting his voice he spoke winged words to them:
'Poor fools — where are we going? Why do you hanker after these evils —
to go down into Circe's hall, who will turn
every one of us into pigs or wolves or lions
to guard her great house for her — and guard it we must —
the way the Cyclops did his work, when our companions
came to his inner yard, and the reckless Odysseus with them:
it was that man's blind folly killed them too.'
So he spoke; and I turned it over in my mind —
whether to draw the long-edged sword from beside my thick thigh,
strike off his head and bring it down in the dust,
kinsman by marriage though he was, and a close one. But my companions
held me back with honeyed words, this one and that one:
'Zeus-born — this man, if you command it, we will leave
here by the ship, to stay and guard the ship;
lead the rest of us to the sacred house of Circe.'
So speaking they went up from the ship and the sea;
and Eurylochus was not left behind by the hollow ship —
he followed. For he feared my terrible rebuke.