But Eurylochus came running back to the fast black ship
to bring the news of the companions and their bitter fate.

And he could not get one word out, for all his straining —
struck to the heart with his great anguish;

his eyes
brimmed full of tears, and his spirit was all lament.

But when we questioned him, all of us, in our amazement,
at last he told the destruction of the other companions:

'We went up through the brush, as you commanded, glorious Odysseus,
and in a forest glen we found a beautiful house, built
of polished stones, in a place with a clear view all around.

And there someone at a great loom was singing, clear and high —
goddess or woman.

And they lifted their voices and called.

And she came out at once, and opened the shining doors,
and invited them in;

and all together, in their innocence,
they followed her.

But I stayed behind, suspecting a snare.

And they vanished — all of them together.

Not one of them
appeared again, though I sat a long time watching.'
So he spoke;

and I slung my silver-studded sword
about my shoulders — the great bronze one — and my bow with it,
and ordered him to lead me back by the same way.

But he seized me with both hands, clasping my knees,
and wailing he spoke winged words to me:

'Do not take me back there — Zeus-nurtured — against my will.

Leave me here.

For I know it:

you will not come back yourself, and you will not bring
one of your companions.

No — with these men here, quickly,
let us run:

we may still escape the evil day.'
So he spoke, and I answered him and said:

'Eurylochus — stay here, then, where you are,
eating and drinking beside the hollow black ship.

But I am going.

Hard necessity is on me.'
So speaking I went up from the ship and the sea.

But just as, threading the sacred glens, I was about
to reach the great house of Circe of the many drugs,
there Hermes of the golden rod met me
as I came toward the house — in the likeness of a young man
with his first down on his lip, in the loveliest season of youth.

He clamped a hand on mine, and spoke a word, and named me:

'Where now, poor doomed man, alone along the heights,
a stranger to the country?

Your companions there in Circe's house
are penned like pigs, packed in their hidden sties.

Is it to free them you are going?

You will not come back yourself,
I tell you:

you will only stay there with the others.

But come — I will release you from the evil, I will save you.

Here.

Take this good drug with you into Circe's house —
it will keep the evil day away from your head.

And I will tell you all the deadly designs of Circe.

She will mix you a potion, and cast drugs into the dish;

but even so she will not have power to bewitch you:

the good drug
I give you will not let her.

And I will tell you everything.

The moment Circe strikes at you with her long wand,
that instant draw the sharp sword from beside your thigh
and go for Circe as though you meant to kill her.

She will be seized with terror, and invite you to her bed.

Do not, then, refuse the bed of the goddess —
if you want her to free your companions and host you well —
but order her to swear the great oath of the blessed ones
that she is not planning some new evil against you:

lest she strip you naked and make you a coward, an unmanned thing.'
So speaking, the slayer of Argus handed me the drug,
pulling it out of the ground, and showed me its nature:

at the root it was black, but its flower like milk.

Moly, the gods call it.

And it is hard for mortal men
to dig — but the gods have power to do all things.

Then Hermes went away over the wooded island
toward high Olympus;

and I went on to the house of Circe,
and my heart ran dark with many things as I went.