I stopped at the doors of the goddess of the lovely hair,
and standing there I shouted;

and the goddess heard my voice.

And she came out at once, and opened the shining doors,
and invited me in;

and I followed her, grieved at heart.

She led me in and seated me on a silver-studded chair,
beautiful, cunningly worked, with a footstool for my feet,
and made me a potion in a golden cup, for me to drink,
and slipped a drug in it, with evil purpose in her heart.

And when she served it and I drank it off — and it did not bewitch me —
she struck me with her wand, and spoke a word, and named me:

'Off to the sty now.

Lie down with the rest of your companions.'
So she spoke;

and I drew the sharp sword from beside my thigh
and went for Circe as though I meant to kill her.

And she shrieked, and ran under the blade, and seized my knees,
and wailing she spoke winged words to me:

'What man are you, and from where?

Where are your city and your parents?

Wonder holds me:

you drank these drugs and were not bewitched —
and no other man, no, not one, has withstood these drugs
once he drank them, once they passed the fence of his teeth.

The mind in your breast is proof against enchantment.

Surely you are Odysseus — the man of many turnings — whom
the golden-rodded slayer of Argus always told me would come,
on his way home from Troy in his fast black ship.

Come now — put your sword in its sheath, and let the two of us
mount my bed together, so that mingled there
in the bed of love, we may come to trust one another.'
So she spoke, and I answered her and said:

'Circe — how can you bid me be gentle with you?

You who turned my companions into pigs in your own halls,
and keep me here, and — scheming still — invite me
to your chamber, to climb into your bed,
so that stripped naked I may be made a coward, an unmanned thing.

I will not consent to climb into your bed
unless you bring yourself, goddess, to swear me the great oath
that you are not planning some new evil against me.'
So I spoke, and she swore it at once, as I demanded.

And when she had sworn, and made an end of the oath,
then I mounted the surpassingly beautiful bed of Circe.