Meanwhile four handmaids were busy through the halls —
the serving-women who keep her house in order,
daughters of the springs and the groves
and the sacred rivers that flow out to the sea.
One of them threw beautiful covers over the chairs,
purple above, with linen spread beneath;
another drew silver tables up before the chairs
and set out golden baskets on them;
the third mixed honey-hearted wine, sweet wine,
in a silver bowl, and set out golden cups;
and the fourth brought water and kindled a great fire
under a huge cauldron, and the water warmed.
And when the water boiled in the bright bronze,
she set me in the tub and bathed me from the great cauldron,
tempering it to my liking, pouring it over my head and shoulders,
until she had taken the heart-wasting weariness from my limbs.
And when she had bathed me and rubbed me richly with oil,
and thrown a beautiful cloak around me, and a tunic,
she led me in and seated me on a silver-studded chair,
beautiful, cunningly worked, with a footstool for my feet;
and a handmaid brought water for my hands in a pitcher,
a beautiful golden one, and poured it over a silver basin
for me to wash, and drew up a polished table beside me.
The grave housekeeper brought bread and set it before me,
laying out delicacies in plenty, giving gladly of her store,
and pressed me to eat. But my heart was not in it:
I sat with my thoughts elsewhere, and my spirit boded evil.
And when Circe saw me sitting there, not reaching
my hands to the bread, gripped in a strong grief,
she came near, and spoke winged words to me:
'Why do you sit like this, Odysseus, like a man struck dumb,
eating your heart, and touching neither food nor drink?
Do you suspect some other snare? You have no cause
to fear: I have already sworn you the strong oath.'
So she spoke, and I answered her and said:
'Circe — what man with any decency in him
could bear to taste of food and drink
before his companions were set free, and he saw them with his eyes?
If you press me in good faith to eat and drink,
then free them — let my eyes see my trusted companions.'
So I spoke, and Circe went out through the hall,
wand in hand, and opened the doors of the sty,
and drove them out — in the shape of nine-year fattened hogs.
They stood there facing her; and she went among them
anointing each with another drug;
and the bristles the baleful drug had grown on them —
the drug the lady Circe gave them — dropped from their limbs,
and they were men again — younger than they were before,
far more beautiful, and taller to the eye.
They knew me; and each man clung to my hands;
and a passionate weeping came over us all, and the house
rang terribly around us; and the goddess herself was moved to pity.