There they bound me fast in the well-benched ship where I sat there,
tightly with twisted cord, while they themselves, disembarking,
hastened along by the beach of the sea to take their evening meal.

But the gods themselves unwound and loosened the bond that was on me
very easily;

and then round my head I drew my foul rag closely,
and by the smooth steering-plank I slipped down and entered the seawater,
breast first, then with both of my hands I pulled through the water,
swimming, and very soon I left them all far in the distance.

Then I climbed where there stood the dense growth of a many-flowered thicket,
and I lay there crouched;

and they went about with loud lamentation.

Yet it did not appear to their minds more profitable, further,
to search any more;

so back once again they made for the vessel,
back to the hollow ship;

but the gods themselves hid and concealed me
very easily, and guided me on to the steading and sheepfold
of a man who had knowledge;

for still it is fated I live on.”
Then in answer you spoke, Eumaeus, swineherd and good man:

“Ah poor stranger, unlucky indeed, you have greatly disturbed me,
telling each thing in order, the sufferings and wanderings you have borne through.

Yet in good order one point is not, and you never will win me,
speaking of great Odysseus;

and why should one such as you are
lie to no purpose at all?

I know very well in my own heart
of my master's return, how hated he was by all the immortals,
utterly, since they did not let him be killed among Trojans,
or in the arms of his friends, when at last he had wound up the war-web.

Then the Panachaeans would have made him a burial mound there,
and for his son thereafter he would have won mighty glory.

But now ingloriously Harpies have swept him away and have taken him.

As for me, I stay here apart among swine;

and I do not go cityward,
unless circumspect Penelope somewhere should urge and command me
to come, whenever tidings have come in from somewhere or other.

Then they all sit around and ask the man questions on all things,
both those who grieve for the lord who has long been absent and vanished,
and those who rejoice while they eat up his substance without paying.

But for me it is not dear at all to inquire and ask further
after the time when an Aetolian man deceived me with story,
one who had killed a man and had wandered over much country,
and he came to my dwelling;

and I embraced him and loved him fully.

He declared he had seen him in Crete, beside Idomeneus’ household,
mending his ships, which storms and tempests had shattered and broken;

and he said he would come either in summer or else in the autumn,
bringing abundant possessions, with comrades like gods in attendance.

And you, old man of many griefs, since a god has now brought you before me,
do not seek my good will by falsehoods, and do not enchant me;

for it is not for this that I shall respect you or love you,
but from fear of Zeus, god of strangers, and pity for your condition.”
Then in answer to him spoke Odysseus, resourceful and steadfast:

“Surely there is in your breast a heart that is wholly untrusting,
seeing that not even swearing an oath can persuade you or move you.

But come now, let us establish between us a binding agreement;

and hereafter let gods who possess Olympus bear witness between us.

If indeed your master comes back to this house as I tell you,
clothe me in cloak and in tunic, in garments, and send me in safety
off to Dulichium, there where my own dear heart has desired to go to;