But when they had put from themselves the desire for drinking and eating,
then Mesaulios took away the bread, and the others toward sleeping,
filled full with bread and with meat, were turning and moving to bed there.

Then there came on a moonless and evil night, and Zeus sent rain down
all through the night, while the mighty wet West Wind blew unceasing.

Then Odysseus spoke among them, testing the swineherd’s spirit,
whether perhaps he would take off his cloak and bestow it upon him,
or else urge one of his comrades to give it, since he cared for him deeply:

“Listen to me now, Eumaeus, and all you companions besides here;

boasting, I think, I will utter a word;

for the wine gives commandment,
maddening stuff, which compels even one who is prudent to sing out,
makes him laugh softly, and rouses him up to dance in his gladness,
and sends forth many a word that were better to leave still unspoken.

But since I have shouted it out at the first, I will hide nothing.

Would that I still were young, and my strength still stood firm within me,
as when beneath Troy we prepared and led forth an ambush.

There Odysseus was leader, and Atreus’ son Menelaus;

with them I was commander as third, for they themselves asked it.

But when at last we had come by the city and steep wall of Ilion,
there in the thick underbrush all around and outside the city,
among reeds and marsh-grass, crouched low underneath our armor,
we lay;

and there came on us an evil night with the North Wind,
freezing;

and over us snow was falling like hoarfrost in whiteness,
cold, and around on the shields the rime and the ice-crust were forming.

There all the others had cloaks and tunics to cover them warmly,
and at their ease they slept with their shoulders wrapped under their shields there.

But I, fool, had left my cloak behind with my comrades departing.

in my own foolishness, since I had not thought I would shiver;

no, I had followed with only my shield and my glittering war-belt.

But when the night was divided in thirds, and the stars had gone onward,
then I spoke to Odysseus, who lay there close beside me,
nudging him there with my elbow;

and quickly he listened and heard me:

“Seed of Zeus, son of Laertes, Odysseus of many devices,
I will not any longer remain with the living;

this storm-cold
masters me, since I have no cloak;

some god has deceived me
into being in one tunic only;

now there is no escape left.”
So I spoke, and at once in his heart he conceived this design there,
such as that man was in planning as well as in standing to battle;

and then speaking low, from behind me, he said me this counsel:

“Silence now, lest some other Achaean happen to hear you.”
So he spoke, and upon his elbow he rested his head, then he told them:

“Hear me, my friends;

in my sleep there came me a god-given dream-vision.

Far indeed from the ships have we come;

but let one man be ready
to tell Agamemnon, the son of Atreus, shepherd of peoples,
that he should urge more men from beside the ships to come toward us.”
So he spoke, and then Thoas arose, Andraemon’s son, in his swiftness,
springing up, and he laid down his cloak of the deep purple color,
and ran on his way to the ships;

and I in that man’s cloak there
lay there gladly at rest, till Dawn on her golden throne shone.

If only now I were young, and my strength were abiding within me,
then would one of the swineherds here in the folds give a cloak to me,
both for kindness and out of respect for the worth of the wearer;

now they dishonor me, since I have evil clothing upon me.”
Then in reply you answered him, Eumaeus the swineherd:

“Old man, the tale that you have recounted is wholly blameless;

not one word have you spoken beyond what is fitting and useful.