Drink now in peace, and let us remember some different matter;

do not remind me of these things.

My heart in my breast here
aches whenever a man calls back my noble lord to my mind.

But come, let us leave aside this oath;

and yet may Odysseus
come as I wish in my heart, and as Penelope wishes,
and old man Laertes, and godlike Telemachus also.

Now it is rather the boy that I mourn with grief unforgetting,
Telemachus, whom Odysseus begot.

The gods reared him splendid,
like a young shoot, and I thought he would be among all men
in no way less than his own dear father, wondrous in stature
and in beauty;

but someone, immortal or mortal, has harmed him,
struck his mind within;

and he went for word of his father
on to holy Pylos.

But the lordly suitors are waiting
there for his journeying home, so that utterly perishes nameless
out of Ithaca the line of godlike Arceisius.

But let us leave him now, whether he may be taken or flee them,
whether the son of Cronos may stretch out his hand there above him.

But come, old sir, tell me now of your own grief and affliction,
and tell me this truthfully too, so that I may know it clearly:

who are you among men, and from where?

Where is your city?

Where are your parents?

On what kind of ship did you come here?

How did the sailors convey you to Ithaca?

Who were they saying
they were?

For I do not suppose you arrived here on footpath.”
Then resourceful Odysseus made answer and spoke in reply to him:

“Therefore I shall tell all these things to you with precision.

If there were food for us two for a long while before us,
and sweet wine in the hut while we sat here within it,
feasting in quiet, while others attended their work and their labor,
easily then for a whole turning year without ceasing
could I speak and still not accomplish the tale of my spirit's
griefs, all the toils I endured by the ordinance given from heaven.

I declare that my lineage springs from broad Crete's people:

I am the son of a rich man;

and many sons in addition
grew up and were born in his halls, true sons by his wedded wife there.

Me a purchased mother bore, a concubine in his household.

Yet Castor son of Hylax, whose stock I declare that I come from,
honored me equally there with the children born in the household.

He in his time was honored among the Cretans like a god was,
for his prosperity, wealth, and the glory of sons in abundance.

But indeed death-dooms came on him and bore him away to the dwelling
down in the house of Hades;

then his proud sons divided
all of the livelihood up, and they cast lots over the portions.

But to me they gave very little, and marked out a house-lot.

Yet I took for my wife a woman from men of great holdings,
won for my own valor, since I was no weak and vain fellow,
nor one who hangs back from war.

But now all that has left me.

Still, I think, by the stubble that stands you may judge of the grainfield.

For a great ruinous trouble beyond all measure has gripped me.

Truly Ares gave me boldness, and Pallas Athena,
and man-shattering force, whenever I chose for an ambush
pick of my men, while planting evils for hostile fighters.

Never once did my proud heart forebode death in its counsels,
but much the first I would leap forth and strike with the spear-point
any foe among enemy men who gave way to my foot-rush.

Such was I in war.

But the work of the field never pleased me,
nor house-management, which is what nourishes glorious children.

No, but to me there were always dear the oar-driven vessels,
and wars, and well-polished spears, and the flight of arrows,
grim things indeed, which make other mortals shudder and tremble.

But these things were dear to me, such as a god placed within me.

For one man finds delight in one kind of labor, another in others.