For before ever the sons of Achaea embarked against Troy-town,
nine times over I led both men and swift-faring vessels
out against foreign men, and much came into my keeping.

From the spoil I would choose what my heart desired, and much afterward
used to fall to me by lot;

so quickly my household increased then,
and thereafter among the Cretans I grew to be feared and respected.

But when at last Zeus of the wide-seeing counsel devised there
that hateful road which loosened the knees of so many mortals,
then they commanded that I and glorious Idomeneus
should lead the ships unto Ilios.

There was no contriving
any refusal;

the people's harsh rumor was heavy upon us.

There for nine years we sons of Achaea made war all together,
In the tenth year we sacked the city of Priam and started
homeward with our ships, but a god dispersed the Achaeans.

Yet against pitiful me Zeus the deep-counseling plotted evils.

One month only I stayed, taking joy in my children,
in my lawful wife and my wealth;

but after that time then
my own spirit urged me to voyage seaward to Egypt,
after I fitted my ships with my comrades like gods beside me.

Nine ships I fitted out, and swiftly the people assembled.

Then for six days in order my trusty companions kept feasting,
while I myself provided abundant beasts for the offerings,
both to sacrifice to the gods and to furnish their banquet.

But on the seventh day, when we had embarked from broad Crete's island,
we sailed on under Boreas, fresh and fair for our sailing,
easily, as though with the stream;

and not one ship among them
came to any harm, but uninjured all and untroubled
there we sat, while the wind and the helmsmen guided them onward.

On the fifth day then we came to the fair-flowing Nile of Egypt,
and there in the river of Egypt I moored my curving ships there.

There indeed I commanded my trusty companions
there by the ships to remain and to guard the seafaring vessels,
and I sent out lookouts to go to the posts of observance.

But they gave way to their pride, yielding, following their own force,
and at once they ravaged the splendid fields of the Egyptians,
carried away their women and little innocent children,
and killed the men;

and quickly the outcry reached to the city.

Hearing the shouting, as soon as the dawn was beginning to show there,
they came, and the whole plain filled full of footmen and horsemen,
and with the flash of bronze;

and Zeus who delights in the thunder
cast ruinous panic on my companions, and no man among them
dared to stand and face them, for doom closed round us on all sides.

There they killed many men of us with the sharp bronze weapon,
others they led away living, compelled to work as their bondmen.

But for me Zeus himself put this design in my spirit—
would that I there had died and had met with my destiny in Egypt,
since there was still more sorrow waiting there to receive me—
straightway I lifted the well-wrought helmet down from my head then,
and the shield from my shoulders, and cast the spear from my hand there.

Then I went to the king where he stood by the front of his chariot,
clasped his knees and kissed them;

and he protected and pitied me,
set me into his car and carried me home while I wept there.

Truly then many men kept rushing against me with ashwood spears,
eager to kill me, for they were enraged beyond all measure;

but he held them back, for he feared the anger of Zeus the protector
of strangers, who most of all is indignant at evil actions.

There for seven full years I remained in that land, and I gathered
much wealth among Egyptian men, for all of them gave me gifts there.