but if your master does not come home, as I now am declaring,
then urge on your serving-men to take me and throw me headlong
down from a great sheer rock, so another poor man may shrink from deception.”
Then in reply the noble swineherd spoke and addressed him:

“Stranger, that surely would win me fair glory and noble repute there
both among men of the present and men of the ages hereafter,
if, when I brought you into my hut and had given you guest-gifts,
then I should kill you again and take your dear life-breath from you.

Then with a willing heart I could pray to Zeus son of Cronos.

But now it is time for supper;

and quickly my comrades within here
ought to be, so in the hut we may make us a hearty meal ready.”
Thus then the two of them spoke such words to one another there.

And now the swine and the men who were herding them came up near them.

Then indeed they penned up the sows in their places for sleeping,
and an unspeakable din of the pigs arose in the fold-yard.

Then to his own companions the noble swineherd called out:

“Bring the best of the hogs, so that I may sacrifice for
this guest from far away;

and we also shall profit thereby, we
who for long have endured and suffered distress for these white-tusks,
while other men eat up our toil and pay us no payment.”
So then he spoke, and with pitiless bronze he was splitting the kindling.

They then brought in a hog, very fat, of five years of age there.

Him they next set beside the hearth;

and the swineherd did not then
fail to remember the deathless gods, for his thoughts had true goodness.

But beginning the rite, he cast in the fire the head-bristles
from the white-tusked boar, and he prayed to the company of gods
that wise Odysseus might come again home to his own house.

Then, lifting a billet of oak that was left from the chopping,
he struck, and the life left the boar;

and the rest slit the throat there.

Quickly they singed him and cut him apart;

and the swineherd then made ready
firstlings from every limb of the flesh, laying them in fat richness,
and these he cast in the fire, sprinkling them over with barley.

The rest they carved into pieces and ran them through spits for roasting,
roasted them carefully through, and when all was done drew them off there,
and they laid them all in the trenchers together.

The swineherd
stood there dividing the feast, for his mind knew fitting measure.

Then he cut and allotted the whole into seven portions.

One of these, with a prayer, he set for the Nymphs and for Hermes,
Maia’s son;

and the other six he divided to each one.

But Odysseus he honored with chine unbroken and lengthy
from the white-tusked hog, and he gladdened the heart of his master.

Then resourceful Odysseus spoke and addressed him directly:

“Would that, Eumaeus, you might be dear to father Zeus truly
even as you are dear to me, since you honor me, though I am wretched.”
Then in reply you answered him, Eumaeus the swineherd:

“Eat, my uncanny guest, and delight yourself in what is here for us.

One thing a god gives, another he leaves;

it is as he chooses,
whatever may please his own heart, for indeed he can do all things.”
So he spoke, and he burned the first cuts for the gods everlasting;

then he poured out the flaming wine and set it in the hands there
of Odysseus, sacker of cities;

then sat by his portion.

And Mesaulios served them the bread, whom the swineherd had purchased
for himself all alone while his lord had been gone and far absent,
apart from his mistress and old Laertes not knowing of it.

Him from the Taphian men he had bought with possessions of his own.

Then to the good fare lying before them they stretched out their hands there.