for from Zeus are all strangers
and all beggars;

and a gift, though little, is precious and welcome,
such as comes from us, for this is the portion of bondmen forever,
living in fear when the masters who hold all the power above them
are but young men.

For the gods have indeed tied up his homecoming,
his, who would have loved me warmly and granted possessions unto me,
house and a portion of land and a wife much courted by many,
such things as a kindly master gives to his household dependent,
one who has labored much for him, and a god gives increase upon it,
just as increase is given to this work of mine, where I stay here.

In return my master would greatly have prospered and honored me, had he
grown old here;

but he is dead.

Would that Helen's whole breed had perished,
sunk to destruction before, since she loosed the knees of so many;

for he too went forth for the sake of the honor of Agamemnon,
went to horse-breeding Ilium there, to battle against the Trojans.”
So he spoke, and swiftly he tightened his tunic close with a girdle,
then he went to the sties where the gathered litters of piglets were penned there.

From there he took out two and brought them, and slaughtered them both there,
singed them and cut them in pieces and spitted them over the firewood.

Then when he had roasted all, he brought it and set it by him there,
hot on the spits themselves, and over it sprinkled white barley;

and in an ivywood cup he mixed the wine that was honey-sweet for him;

then he sat down across from his guest, and urged him onward, saying:

“Eat now, stranger, what is set before household servants for portion:

Pork then;

yet fatted swine the suitors are eating in plenty,
keeping no thought in their hearts for the gods’ overseeing or pity.

Truly the blessed gods do not love deeds that are ruthless and lawless,
but they honor justice and honor the rightful works of men.

Even men that are hostile and savage, raiders on foray,
living upon foreign land when Zeus grants booty unto them,
once they have filled up their ships they depart for returning homeward,
even on them there falls in the heart a strong fear of requital.

But these men also know something;

they heard some voice of a god there,
telling of his grim ruin;

therefore they are not willing in justice
either to woo or go back to the homes that belong to them, rather
here at their ease they consume his possessions with arrogant wastefulness.

For as many as nights are and days that come down from great Zeus’ hand,
never once do they slaughter one victim alone, nor only two ones;

wine as well they keep draining in insolence, drawing it freely.

For indeed his livelihood once was beyond all measure and telling;

no man here among heroes possessed so much, not on the dark mainland,
nor in Ithaca self;

no, not twenty men together
have such wealth in their hands;

and I now will recount it before you.

Twelve are the herds on the mainland, and just so many sheep-flocks,
just so many swine-droves, and so many broad-pastured goat-herds,
fed by hired strangers and also by herdsmen that are his own people.

Here meanwhile at the farthest edge are eleven goat-herds in all,
broad-ranging, grazing, and over them stand excellent keepers.

Each one of these men, every day, drives a beast to the suitors,
whichever of all the rich-fattened goats may appear to be finest.

But as for me, I keep these swine and guard them from destruction,
and I choose out the best of the pigs and send it before them.”
So he spoke, and the other kept eating the meat and the wine there
eagerly, saying no word, but in heart sowing doom for the suitors.