But when the eighth returning year had come upon me,
then there came a Phoenician man well versed in deceits there,
a cheat, a man-devouring rogue, who had wrought many evils.

He beguiled me with craft in his heart, so that we came together
into Phoenicia, the place where his house and possessions were lying.

There I remained beside him through the full course of a year there.

But when the months and the days were now being completed,
as the year wheeled round again and the seasons came onward,
then on a seafaring ship he put me aboard bound for Libya,
plotting his lies, so that I might help him convey his cargo,
and that there he might sell me and take an uncountable ransom.

I followed with him on the ship, though suspecting it, under compulsion.

On she ran with Boreas, fresh and fair for the voyaging onward,
over the midst of the sea past Crete;

but Zeus planned their destruction.

But when we had left behind us Crete, and no other country
anywhere could be seen, but only the sky and the seaways,
then the son of Cronos set a dark cloud over the vessel,
over the hollow ship, and the sea grew dark beneath it.

Zeus at the same time thundered and cast his bolt at the vessel;

all of the ship reeled round when struck by the bolt of the thunder-god,
and it filled with sulfurous smoke;

and all men fell from the vessel.

Like to the sea-crows they drifted around the black ship there,
borne on the waves;

and the god took away their day of returning.

But to me Zeus himself, though I had pain in the heart there,
placed in my hands the immense tall mast of the dark-prowed vessel,
so that I still might somehow escape from the evil before me.

Round it I wound myself fast and was borne by the baneful stormwinds.

Nine days I was borne, and on the tenth in the blackness of night then
a great rolling wave drove me near to the land of the Thesprotians.

There did Pheidon the hero, the king of the Thesprotians, save me,
asking no price;

for his own dear son had encountered and found me,
broken by cold clear air and by weariness, led me homeward,
raising me up by the hand until we came to his father's palace,
and he put clothing around me, a cloak and a tunic upon me.

There I heard news of Odysseus;

for he indeed was saying
he had received him as guest and had loved him, bound for his homeland,
and he showed me the treasures, all that Odysseus had gathered,
bronze and gold in abundance, and iron laboriously fashioned.

Even to a tenth generation one more man might still live on it;

such were the stores of the lord that lay in the halls of the master.

And he said he had gone to Dodona, that there he might listen
there from the high-leaved oak to the counsel of Zeus our father,
how he might journey back to the rich-furrowed people of Ithaca,
whether returning at last openly, or else in secret.

He swore it himself in my presence, and poured out drink in his palace,
that a ship had been hauled down and companions stood all in readiness,
men who would send him away to his own dear fatherland safely.

But he dispatched me first, for it chanced that there was a vessel
of Thesprotian men on the way to wheat-rich land of Dulichium.

He urged them to send me with care to the king, to Acastus;

but for those men an evil design was pleasing within them
touching my fate, so that pain might become my full portion thereafter.

But when far from the land the seafaring ship had departed,
straightway they plotted for me the day of slavery and bondage.

Off of me then they stripped both cloak and tunic, the garments I carried,
and around me they cast some other wretched rag and a tunic,
tattered and torn, the same that you can behold with your own eyes;

and by evening they came to the fields of clear-seen Ithaca.