But when he had supped and had satisfied fully his spirit with victuals,
then the man filled up for him the cup from which he himself drank,
filled it with wine to the brim, and he gave it;

the guest took it gladly,
and rejoicing at heart he addressed him with winged words, saying:

“Dear friend, who was the man that purchased you with his possessions,
being so wealthy indeed and so strong, as you tell in your speaking?

Yet you say that he perished because of Agamemnon’s honor.

Tell me his name, in case I may know such a man if I meet him.

Zeus perhaps knows this thing, and the other immortal gods also,
whether by seeing I might report him;

for far have I wandered.”
Then in answer the swineherd replied, that commander of people:

“Old sir, no man that came here wandering, bringing news of that master,
ever would persuade his wife or the son that he cherished dearly.

Rather, men wanting support, mere vagabonds roaming about here,
utter lies at random and do not wish to tell what is truthful.

Whoever comes wandering into the people and land of Ithaca,
going then to my mistress, talks over deceits and inventions.

She gives welcome kindly and loves him and asks him each matter,
and from her eyelids tears drop down as she mourns while she listens,
as is the way of a wife whenever her husband has perished afar off.

You as well, old father, would quickly have fashioned a story,
if some man were to give you a mantle and tunic for clothing.

But by now his skin from his bones have the dogs and the swift birds torn off,
and the life-breath has left him;

or fishes have eaten him in the sea-depth,
and his bones on the mainland are lying somewhere on the seashore,
covered around and concealed in a multitude deep of the sand there.

Thus he has perished away from us there, and behind him has left grief
unto all of his friends, and to me most of all beyond others;

never again shall I find so gentle a lord, wherever I travel,
not even if I should come once more to the house of my father and mother,
there where first I was born and they themselves reared and sustained me.

Yet not even for them do I grieve with a sorrow so heavy, although I
long with my eyes to behold them again in the land of my fathers.

No, but longing for gone Odysseus consumes me and takes me.

Him, my friend, though absent, I am ashamed even now to name loudly,
since exceedingly he loved me and cared for me deep in his spirit.

Still I call him my dear one, although he is far off and absent.”
Then to him again spoke resourceful divine Odysseus:

“Friend, since you utterly now deny, and no longer are saying
that he will come, but always your heart is set fast in mistrusting,
therefore I shall not speak merely so, but swear you an oath on it:

home will come Odysseus;

and let there be good-news reward for me
instantly, once in his going he reaches his own halls in safety:

clothe me then in a mantle and tunic, fair garments to wear there.

But before that time, though I am in need beyond measure, I take nothing.

For as hateful to me as the gates of Hades is that man
who, yielding to poverty, speaks out deceit and false stories.

Let Zeus witness now first among gods, and the hospitable table,
and the hearth of noble Odysseus, to which I have come as a suppliant:

surely all these things will be brought to pass as I tell you.

Within this very round of the year Odysseus will come here.

As this month wanes away, and the next one rises upon us,
home he will make his return, and he will punish whoever
here in this place dishonors his wife and his glorious young son.”
Then in reply you answered him, Eumaeus the swineherd:

“Old man, I for one will not pay for this good news you bring me,
nor will Odysseus come ever again to his household.