The Odyssey — Book 1

The gods take counsel; Athena visits Telemachus.

Tell me, O Muse, of the versatile man, who was driven to wander
after he ravaged the god-hallowed fortress—the city of Trojans.
Many the cities of men that he saw, and he learned of their thinking;
many the griefs he endured on the sea, in the depths of his own heart,
striving to save his own life and to bring his companions back homeward.
Still he could never deliver his comrades, for all of his striving:
for it was they, by their own witless outrage, who brought on their ruin—
fools, who had eaten the cattle of Helios, high-going Sun-god.
Helios robbed them of homecoming's day—the return to their homeland.
Choose where to start it, O goddess, O daughter of Zeus, and now tell us.

Then all the others, as many as fled from precipitous ruin,
rested at home, having fled from the war and the waste of the sea-way.
Only the one man, hungry for home and the sight of his own wife,
him did Calypso the queenly, most radiant goddess, detain there,
deep in her hollow caves, longing to hold him and make him her husband.
But as the seasons revolved, then the year came around in its circle
when the immortals had spun his return and his journey back homeward,
homeward to Ithaca; even on Ithaca, trials were waiting,
even among his own people. The gods were all moved to pity,
all but Poseidon: implacable rage in him burned without ceasing,
anger at godlike Odysseus, barring his road to his country.

Meanwhile Poseidon had gone far away to the distant Ethiopians,
the Ethiopians, parted in two, most distant of mortals,
some at the setting of high-going Helios, some at his rising.
Meeting Poseidon, they offered a hundred of bulls and of rams there.
There he delighted, attending the feast; but the rest of the deathless
gathered together inside of the halls of Olympian Zeus then.
First among all of them spoke out the father of men and immortals,
for in his mind he remembered Aegisthus, the man without blemish,
whom Agamemnon's illustrious son, young Orestes, had slaughtered.
Thinking of him, Zeus spoke these words to the deathless immortals:

“How astonishing, mortals are always accusing the gods now!
Out of the gods, they declare, come evils; and yet they themselves, too,
reckless beyond what is fated, are makers of all of their sorrows.
Just as Aegisthus, exceeding his fate, took the wife of Atreides,
wedded her, killing the warrior himself when at last he came homeward,
though he foresaw his destruction, for we had forewarned him ourselves when
Hermes we sent him, the keen-sighted slayer of Argus, commanding
neither to murder the man nor to court Agamemnon's own bedmate.
Vengeance would come from Orestes at last for the son of Atreus,
once he had come into manhood and yearned for the land of his fathers.
Hermes advised him, intending his good; but he never persuaded
Aegisthus' heart. He has paid the whole debt in a single hard moment.”

Then in reply spoke the gray-eyed goddess Athena directly:

“Father of all, son of Cronos, supreme among those who have power,
truly that man has been laid in the ruin that he had deserved there.
Thus may another be ruined, whoever accomplishes such things.
Yet for Odysseus, battle-wise, deep in me smolders a heartache—
ill-fated man, who has suffered so long far away from his loved ones,
held on an island wave-washed, at the navel and heart of the sea-depths,
thick-grown with trees, where a goddess inhabits a house in the forest,
daughter of Atlas, that baneful intelligence, Atlas who fathoms
every abyss of the sea and alone holds upright the towering
columns that keep the broad heaven and earth forever apart.
Daughter of Atlas it is who restrains the despairing Odysseus,
always beguiling his spirit with words that are gentle and cunning,
hoping that Ithaca fades from his mind. But the heart of Odysseus
longs to behold even smoke as it rises aloft from his homeland;
longing to die is upon him. Yet even your heart is not moved now,
god of Olympus! Did not this Odysseus win your approval,
making you offerings there by the ships of the Argives at Troyland?
Why are you holding such wrath against great Odysseus, Zeus-father?”

Zeus who assembles the cloud banks answered Athena's complaint then:

“Child of my being, what word has escaped from the fence of your teeth now?
How could I ever forget the resourceful, godlike Odysseus,
first among mortals in counsel and first in the gifts that he offers
all to the deathless gods who possess the expanses of heaven?
No, but Poseidon who girdles the earth is unending in anger,
wrathful because of the Cyclops whose eye that Odysseus blinded,
he, Polyphemus the godlike, is mightiest far of the Cyclopes.
Mother Thoösa, the nymph, bore him—she was daughter of Phorcys,
Phorcys, the lord of the fathomless salt sea—she was his daughter,
she in the hollow caves had embraced the earth-shaking Poseidon.
Ever since then, the earth-shaking lord Poseidon Odysseus
does not destroy, but he drives him afar from the land of his fathers.
Come, let us all now consider together and fashion his homeward
journey and how he may come. Then Poseidon will put down his anger;
never alone can he strive and contend with the will of us all here,
one against every immortal god, in despite of our purpose.”

Then in reply spoke the gray-eyed goddess Athena directly:

“Father of all, son of Cronos, supreme among those who have power,
if this is truly the pleasure at last of the blessed immortals,
homeward to send the resourceful Odysseus into his household,
Hermes the guide and the keen-sighted slayer of Argus, dispatch him
straight to Ogygia's island, and send him with greatest swiftness
there to announce to the nymph with the beautiful hair our decision:
steadfast Odysseus must be released and begin his returning.
I shall descend into Ithaca, there to approach his own son and
stir him to greater endeavor and put a new strength in his spirit,
calling to council the long-haired Achaeans assembled together,
there to renounce all the suitors, the men who are day after day now
slaughtering thick-thronging sheep and the shambling and crook-horned cattle.
Then I shall send him to Sparta and onward to sand-covered Pylos,
seeking report of his dear father's homecoming, if he may hear it,
so that an excellent fame among mortals may rise and possess him.”

Speaking, she fastened beneath her the beautiful sandals immortal,
golden, ambrosial sandals that bore her across the sea-water
also across the unbounded earth on the breath of the windstorm.
Taking her powerful spear, bronze-pointed and whetted to sharpness,
weighty and huge and unyielding, the spear that demolishes war-ranks,
ranks of the heroes who kindle the mighty-born goddess to anger,
down from the crests of Olympus she swept in a flashing descent then,
came to the land of Ithaca, stood at Odysseus' forecourt,
just on the outermost threshold, the bronze-pointed spear in her right hand,
seeming a stranger, the lord of the Taphians, Mentes the sea-king.

There she discovered the arrogant suitors, who then were amusing
each his own heart with the counters in front of the doors of the palace,
seated on hides of the oxen that they with their own hands had slaughtered.
Heralds were busily moving among them with diligent servants:
some men were mixing the wine and the water together in wine bowls,
others with sponges of many holes washed off the tables and polished
each, setting all of them forth, while the carvers apportioned the meat cuts.

Godlike Telemachus noticed her first, long before any other,
there with the suitors he sat, but his dear heart sorrowed within him,
minding his excellent father and seeing him inwardly: would he
come from afar, then scatter the suitors apart through the palace,
winning his honor again and becoming the lord of his household?
Thinking of this, as he sat with the suitors, he noticed Athena.
Straight to the forecourt he went, for his spirit was stung with resentment,
seeing the stranger stand long at the gates; he approached and stood near her,
taking her right hand in welcome, received the great bronze-pointed war-spear,
then he addressed her aloud, and his words had the swiftness of wingbeats:

“Welcome, my stranger; among us as friend you shall first be received here;
after you savor your supper, declare what occasion has brought you.”

Speaking, he led her within, and Pallas Athena came with him.
After the two of them entered the high-roofed hall of the palace,
carrying onward the spear, he set it beside a tall pillar,
there in the finely constructed spear-holder, standing with other
weapons in numbers belonging to patient and steadfast Odysseus.
Leading Athena, he seated her there on a throne, spreading linen
beautiful, cunningly wrought, with a footstool placed under her ankles.
Close by her side for himself he positioned a many-hued armchair,
far from the suitors, for fear that the stranger, oppressed by their uproar,
might take no pleasure in supper among those overbearing people;
also that he might inquire for his father, so long now departed.

Water for washing a servant brought in a beautiful golden
pitcher and poured it above a basin of silver beneath it,
so they could wash, then drew a polished table beside them.
Bread the respected housekeeper carried and set there before them,
adding abundant delicacies, freely bestowing her storehouse;
lifting the platters, a carver provided them meat of all kinds and
set them beside them, and also placed golden cups there before them.
Often the herald approached them and poured them the wine as they wanted.

Into the hall came the arrogant suitors and each in his order
seated himself on the benches and high-backed chairs at the tables.
Heralds poured water for handwashing over the hands of the suitors,
slave women carried the bread and piled it in baskets beside them,
young men filled every great mixing bowl to the brim with the wine draught.
They reached out eagerly then for the good things arrayed there before them.
After desire for food and for drinking had left them contented,
other concerns then arose in the hearts of the arrogant suitors:
music and dancing, the shining adornments that finish a banquet.
One herald carried the beautiful lyre to the hands of Phemius,
forced into singing before the assembled suitors, unwilling.
Touching the lyre strings, he lifted his voice and began the fine singing.

Meanwhile Telemachus spoke to the gray-eyed goddess Athena,
leaning his head very close, so the other men could not perceive it:

“Dear guest, will you take offense at the word I am going to tell you?
These men take pleasure in nothing but music and song and enjoyment,
easily eating another man's livelihood, free of repayment—
one whose white bones have been rotting in rain on the shore of a mainland,
or in the sea as the wave rolls over and under and round them.
If they could witness the man once again making Ithaca homeward,
all of them then would be praying their feet to be faster and lighter,
rather than praying for greater abundance of raiment and gold wealth.
Now he has perished instead by an evil doom, and no longer
have we a comfort, although some mortal arising should tell us
he will return, for the light of the day of his homecoming perished.
Come, though, and tell me the following things, and recount them with candor:
Who among men are you? Where are the city and parents who bore you?
What kind of vessel delivered you here, and in what way did sailors
bring you to Ithaca? What was the people they boasted they came from?
Surely I cannot imagine you came to this island on footpaths.
Tell me another thing also with truth, so that I may discern it:
is this the first time you visit, or were you my father's old guest-friend?
Many indeed were the other men who came into our household,
since he himself went visiting widely among human peoples.”

Answering him once again was the gray-eyed goddess Athena:

“Therefore, all of these things I shall tell you exactly and truly.
Mentes I boast I am, son of Anchialus, skilled in battle,
lord over Taphians also, a nation delighting in oar-work.
Now I have come with my vessel and comrades and put into harbor,
sailing the wine-dark sea on my way among alien speakers,
bound for Temese for bronze, with a cargo of fiery iron.
There is my ship, which is standing out there in the fields from the city,
anchored in Rheithron harbor below forest-mantled Mount Neion.
We from our fathers declare that our houses are friendly as guest-friends,
right from the first: you may ask the old man if you go to inquire there,
hero Laertes, although people say he no longer approaches
town, but resides in the countryside far off, suffering sorrows,
there with an elderly handmaid who carries his food and his wine cup
out to him, whenever weariness seizes the strength of his body,
slowly he creeps up the slope of the vineyard with dark-purple clusters.
Now I have come, for they told me your father was here with his people;
but he is not—the immortals have hampered his path of returning.
Godlike Odysseus has not yet died on the earth, I assure you,
still he is living and held on the broad sea away from his country,
held on a wave-washed island, and violent men have detained him,
savage and cruel, who keep him against his desire from returning.
Now I shall offer a prophecy, just as the gods in my spirit
cast it, and just as I think it is fated to reach its fulfillment,
though I am not any prophet nor learned in signs of the bird-flight.
Not for much longer shall he be away from the land of his fathers,
not even though he be fastened and held in the strongest of iron chains.
He shall devise his return, for his mind is abundant in stratagems.
Come, though, and tell me the following things, and recount them with candor:
Are you indeed, grown so tall as I see, son of great Odysseus?
You have a terrible likeness to him in your head and your fine eyes.
Often indeed did Odysseus and I meet together in friendship,
before he departed for Troy, when the rest of the Argive commanders,
all of the best of the Argives, embarked in the hollow-built vessels.
Never from then have I looked on Odysseus, nor has he seen me.”

Then in reply clear-minded Telemachus spoke and addressed her:

“Therefore, stranger, I now shall tell you exactly and truly.
Mother declares I am his; for myself I have no way of knowing:
never has any man known for himself who gave him life.
Would I had rather been born as the son of a fortunate mortal,
one whom his old age found in the midst of possessions and riches.
Now from the most ill-fated of mortal men, so they tell me,
I have been sprung, since about him you ask me and press for an answer.”

Answering him once again was the gray-eyed goddess Athena:

“Never shall gods make your lineage nameless in days of the future,
since Penelope has borne such a son as yourself in her household.
Come, though, and tell me the following things, and recount them with candor:
What is the feast, what assembly is this, and what is your need here?
Is it a wedding or banquet? It is not a feast with contributions.
How unrestrained and exceedingly arrogant these men appear here,
feasting throughout the whole house! Any man would be moved to resentment,
seeing these manifold shames, if a sensible man came among them.”

Then in reply clear-minded Telemachus spoke and addressed her:

“Stranger, because you inquire of me closely and ask me these questions,
once this household was destined for riches and honor abundant,
while that excellent man stayed here among his own kindred and people.
Now have the gods, with a purpose of evil, decided another
fate: they made him unseen above all other men who have vanished.
Never would I have been grieving like this, had he fallen and perished
there with his own companions away in the country of Trojans,
or in the arms of his friends after winding the war to completion.
Then the Achaeans together would raise him a tomb in his honor,
and for his son he would win great glory to live in the future.
Now he has vanished without any glory, the storm winds have snatched him;
gone out of sight and unheard of, but leaving me anguish and mourning.
Nor is it only for him I am grieving and groaning in sorrow;
other calamitous troubles the gods have fashioned upon me.
All of the noblest men who are rulers among all the islands,
men of Dulichium, Same, and the forested isle of Zacynthus,
all who possess any lordship throughout craggy Ithaca also,
all of them court my own mother and ruin the wealth of my household.
She neither finally refuses the hateful marriage nor brings it
ever to pass; while they keep on consuming and wasting the household.
Soon they will shatter and tear me to pieces as well as my riches.”

Angered at this, then Pallas Athena addressed him directly:

“Shame! You are greatly in need of Odysseus, far now and absent,
so he could set his two hands on the shameless and arrogant suitors.
Would that returning Odysseus now stood in front of the doorway,
holding his helmet and shield and a pair of his bronze-pointed war-spears,
just as he was when I first came to know him and saw him among us,
there in our household, enjoying the feast and delighting in wine cups,
coming from Ephyra, visiting Ilus, the son of Mermerus—
there had Odysseus traveled as well in a swift-running vessel,
seeking a man-killing poison with which he intended to cover
bronze-headed arrows. But Ilus refused him the poison he sought there,
fearing the gods who remain ever living. My father, however,
gave him the poison, because he exceedingly loved great Odysseus.
Would that Odysseus now in such guise could encounter the suitors!
Swift would their doom be and bitter the wedding they hope to accomplish.
Yet all of this is at rest on the knees of the gods in their council,
whether he comes and repays them at home, or the gods do not grant it.
You, though, I urge to consider with care and discover a method
how you can drive these suitors away from the halls of your household.
Come now, attend and give heed to the words I shall speak in your hearing:
tomorrow call all the long-haired Achaeans to meet in assembly,
speak your declaration there before all, and let gods be your witnesses.
Order the suitors to scatter themselves, each man to his household.
As for your mother, if marriage is stirring the heart in her bosom,
let her return to the mighty ancestral house of her father.
There they shall make her a marriage and ready the gifts for the bride-price,
many and splendid, as fitting the daughter her father holds dearest.
For you yourself I have careful advice, if only you heed me:
fit out the best of the ships you can find with a twenty-man oar-crew,
go and inquire for your father, so long from his people departed.
Maybe a mortal will tell you, or maybe you hear a god's Rumor,
born out of Zeus, which above other things carries glory to mortals.
First you must go into Pylos and question the godlike old Nestor,
afterward travel to Sparta and visit the golden-haired warlord,
King Menelaus, the last to return of the bronze-armored Argives.
If you receive any word your father is living and homebound,
then, though distressed and diminished, endure for another whole year still.
If they should tell you instead he is dead and no longer among them,
come once again to the land of your fathers, the country you cherish,
heap him a tomb and perform at the tomb every rite of the dead man,
many and splendid, as fitting, then give your own mother a husband.
After you finally carry to action and finish these duties,
then with your heart and your mind take counsel and fashion a method
how in the halls of your household to kill every suitor assembled,
whether by cunning or openly. You must no longer be playing
childish and foolish games; you have now outgrown such behavior.
Have you not heard what magnificent fame great Orestes has gathered
everywhere out among mortals because he destroyed the man-killer,
crooked Aegisthus, the murderer who slew his famous own father?
You, my dear friend—for I see you are very well grown and fine-looking—
must become brave, so that late generations will speak of you nobly.
Now I shall go to the swift-running ship and descend to the seashore,
back to my comrades, who must be exceedingly troubled by waiting.
All of these things are your charge; give heed to the words I have spoken.”

Then in reply clear-minded Telemachus spoke and addressed her:

“Stranger, the words you are speaking reveal your affectionate purpose,
just like a father addressing a son; I shall always remember.
Come, though, and stay here awhile, although you are pressed for your journey,
so you may bathe and refresh your own spirit with pleasure before you,
holding a gift, take your way to the ship with delight in your spirit,
something of great value, beautiful, fit to be kept as your treasure,
given by me, such a gift as beloved guest-friends give to guest-friends.”

Then in reply spoke the gray-eyed goddess Athena directly:

“Do not detain me now longer, for greatly I long for the roadway.
As for the gift, whatsoever your heart and your spirit would give me,
give it to me when I come once again, to be carried back homeward,
choosing a beautiful gift, and its worthy exchange shall be yours then.”

Speaking these words, the gray-eyed Athena departed and vanished,
flying away like a bird through a roof vent; but into his spirit
she had implanted a force and a courage, recalled to his memory
more of his father than ever before. When he noticed the god-work,
wonder and awe filled his spirit; he knew she had been a divinity.
Straightway he went to the suitors again, like a god in his aspect.

There the renowned singer sang while the suitors in silence were seated,
listening close; he was singing the grievous Achaean returning
homeward from Troy, the calamity Pallas Athena had laid on them.
High in her rooms, meanwhile, she attended the god-given music—
she was Penelope, wise-minded daughter of lord Icarius.
Down from the uppermost room of her house she descended the high stair,
not by herself; two maidservants followed beside and behind her.
When she arrived at the suitors, divine among all mortal women,
stood by the pillar supporting the roof of the solid-built palace,
holding her shining veil as a screen for the front of her two cheeks.
One trusted handmaid was standing to either side of the lady.
Weeping, she turned to the godlike singer and spoke to him gently:

“Phemius, many enchantments you know for the ears of us mortals,
deeds of immortals and men, which the singers make famous in story.
Sing them another of these as you sit, while the suitors in silence
drink of their wine; but cease from performing this sorrowful song now,
bitter and cruel, which always is wearing the heart in my bosom,
since unforgettable sorrow has fallen on me beyond others.
Such is the head that I long for, remembering it without ceasing,
that of the man whose renown fills Hellas and Argos between them.”

Then in reply clear-minded Telemachus spoke and addressed her:

“Mother of mine, why begrudge the reliable singer his pleasure,
giving delight in the way that his spirit impels? Not the singers
cause this, but Zeus is the cause, who bestows upon bread-eating mortals
what he desires, to each man separately, just as he chooses.
No indignation is due him for singing the Danaans' ill fate;
mortals give greatest renown to the song most newly arisen
when it is heard. Let the heart and the spirit within you be steadfast.
Let your own heart and your spirit be bold to endure it and listen:
not by Odysseus only was homecoming lost there at Troyland;
many indeed were the other men also who perished beside him.
Go to your chambers again and attend to the work that awaits you,
loom and the distaff, and order the maids to be busy about their
work; speech shall be the concern of the men, every man, and among them
me above all, for the power is mine in the halls of the household.”

Struck with amazement, she went back again to the rooms of her household,
taking to heart the clear-minded speech of the son she had carried.
Up to the chambers aloft she ascended together with handmaids;
there for Odysseus, husband beloved, she wept until slumber
sweetly was cast on her eyelids by gray-eyed goddess Athena.

Meanwhile the suitors were raising a din through the shadowy palace,
every man praying to stretch himself out by the lady in bed there.
Then clear-minded Telemachus started a speech to the suitors:

“Suitors who court my own mother with insolence over all measure,
now for the present let feasting delight us, and let there be no loud
uproar, for beautiful is it to hear such a singer performing,
one who is like the immortals themselves in the sound of his singing.
At the first light, let us go to the assembly and sit there together,
all of us, so I may speak my declaration to you without hiding:
get from my halls and attend to your feasts in the houses of others,
eating your own possessions and changing from one house to another.
But if it seems to your hearts to be better and more advantageous,
one man's livelihood wasting away without making repayment,
ravage it still; but I shall appeal to the gods everlasting,
hoping that Zeus may allow retributive deeds to befall you:
then in this house you would die, and not one of you gain compensation.”

Thus he addressed them; they all bit their lips in their anger and marveled,
hearing Telemachus speak with such courage and boldness before them.
Then in reply came Antinous, son of Eupeithes, and spoke thus:

“Telemachus, gods themselves must be teaching you now to be lofty,
making your speeches with such an audacious and confident spirit.
Never may Cronos' son make you king in the sea-circled island,
Ithaca, even though this is your right by descent from your father.”

Then in reply clear-minded Telemachus spoke and addressed him:

“Will you take anger, Antinous, hearing the words I shall tell you?
Even this kingship I gladly would take if Zeus freely then gave it.
Do you assert that to be the worst fate that can come among mankind?
There is no evil in kingship; immediately wealth fills the household,
honor attaches as well to the man and increases around him.
Yet there are certainly other Achaean kings in abundance,
here on the sea-circled island of Ithaca, younger and older;
one may take kingship among them, because great Odysseus perished.
I shall remain, though, the lord of our household and all its possessions,
also the lord of the slaves godlike Odysseus won for my keeping.”

Eurymachus, son of Polybus, answered the prince in return then:

“Telemachus, surely these matters repose on the knees of the godhead:
who of Achaeans shall rule as the king of the sea-circled Ithaca.
May you yourself keep possessions and govern the halls of your household.
Never may any man come who by violence strips you unwilling
of your possessions while Ithaca still is a land full of people.
Still, my good man, I desire to inquire of the stranger who came here:
Whence was this man, and what was the country he claimed as his homeland?
Where were his people, and where his ancestral plowlands that bore him?
Did he perhaps bring a message announcing your father's returning,
or was some private necessity bringing him here to your household?
How in a moment he sprang and was gone, never waiting for others
to know him better! In no way, indeed, was he base in his features.”

Then in reply clear-minded Telemachus spoke and addressed him:

“Eurymachus, truly my father's return has vanished forever.
Never again shall I trust any message, wherever arising,
nor any prophecy heed that a seer may reveal to my mother
seeks when she summons a prophet and questions him here in the palace.
This man, however, is one of my father's old guest-friends from Taphos;
Mentes he says he is, son of Anchialus, skilled in battle,
and he is lord of the Taphian people who take joy in oar-work.”

Thus spoke Telemachus, knowing within that she was an immortal.
Turning themselves to the dance and the song that awakens desire,
they took delight and continued to wait for the coming of evening.
While they delighted themselves, black evening descended upon them.
Then they departed for sleep, each man to the house that was his own.

But to his chamber Telemachus went, overlooking the splendid
court, constructed high up in a place with a view all around it.
There to his bed he retired, with many concerns in his thinking.
With him a loyal old woman, who carried the fire-blazing torches,
Eurycleia went, daughter of Ops, descended from Peisenor,
whom long ago lord Laertes had bought with the wealth he possessed then,
still in the first of her youth; twenty cattle he paid for the woman.
Just as he honored his faithful wife, so he honored this woman,
never embracing her bed, for he dreaded his own wife's resentment.
She carried blazing torches beside the young prince, and she loved him
more than the other slave women, for she had nursed him in childhood.
Opening wide the two doors of the strongly constructed bedchamber,
there on the bed he sat down and removed the soft folds of his tunic,
casting it into the hands of the wise-minded elderly woman.
Folding the tunic, the woman smoothed out every crease in the fabric,
hung it aloft on a peg by the intricate frame of the bedstead,
then from the chamber went out, pulling shut by the silver door handle
firmly the door, and she drew by its strap the bolt into position.
There through the whole night, wrapped in the choicest fleece of the sheep-flock,
he in his mind and his heart planned the road that Athena had shown him.
