and let the godlike singer, with the clear lyre in his hands,
lead us all in the steps of the playful dance —
so that anyone who hears it from outside will say, 'A wedding!' —
a passer-by on the road, or one of our neighbors round about —
so that the wide rumor of the suitors' killing does not run
down through the town before we can get away
out to our orchard-farm among the trees.

There, after,
we shall see what profit the Olympian puts into our hands."
So he spoke;

and they listened well and obeyed.

First they bathed themselves, and put clean tunics on,
and the women dressed;

and the godlike singer took up
the hollow lyre, and woke in all of them the craving
for the sweetness of song and the blameless dance.

And the great house rang around them to the footfalls
of men at play and fair-belted women dancing;

and a man would say, hearing it from outside the house:

"So!

Someone has married the much-wooed queen at last.

Hard woman — she had not the heart to keep her wedded
husband's great house through to the end, until he came."
So a man would say.

And they did not know how things stood.

And meanwhile, inside his house, great-hearted Odysseus
was bathed by the housekeeper Eurynome, and rubbed with oil,
and she put a beautiful mantle round him, and a tunic;

and over him, from the head down, Athena poured great beauty:

taller to look at, and broader, and down from his head
she made the locks flow in curls, like the hyacinth flower.

As when a man lays gold over silver — a craftsman
whom Hephaestus and Pallas Athena have taught
art of every kind, and he finishes works full of grace —
so she poured grace over his head and shoulders.

Out of the bath he came, in build like the immortals,
and sat back down on the chair from which he had risen,
opposite his wife, and spoke his word to her:

"Strange woman!

To you beyond all womankind
the dwellers on Olympus gave an unyielding heart.

No other woman would harden her heart like this,
and stand apart from a husband who, after suffering much,
came in the twentieth year to his own fatherland.

Well then, nurse — make me up a bed, so I can lie down
by myself at least.

The heart in this one's breast is iron."
Then watchful-minded Penelope answered him:

"Strange man!

I am not being proud, and I am not slighting you —
nor am I too much amazed.

I know very well what you were
when you went from Ithaca on your long-oared ship.

Well then — Eurycleia:

make up the packed bedstead for him
outside the well-built bridal chamber — the bed he made
with his own hands.

Move the packed bedstead out there for him,
and pile the bedding on:

the fleeces, the cloaks, the shining blankets."
So she spoke — testing her husband.

And Odysseus
flared out in anger at his true-hearted wife:

"Woman — that is a wounding word you have spoken!

Who has set my bed somewhere else?

That would be hard
even for a skilled workman — unless a god in person came
and set it down, at his easy will, in some other place:

no living mortal man, not one in his best young strength,
could lightly lever it aside.

For a great sign is built
into that worked bed — and I made it:

I, no other man.

A bush of olive grew inside the courtyard fence, long-leaved,
full-grown and flourishing, its trunk thick as a pillar.

Around it I built our chamber, and I worked at it till it was done —
close-set stone;

and I roofed it well above,
and hung the jointed doors on it, close-fitting.

Then — and only then — I cut back the long-leaved olive's crown,
trimmed the trunk up from the root, and with the bronze I planed it
smooth all round, with skill, and trued it to the line:

a bedpost worked from the living tree.