And the old woman climbed to the upper room, laughing aloud,
to tell her mistress that her own dear husband was in the house;

her knees were pumping fast, her feet stumbled with hurry.

She stood over Penelope's head and spoke to her:

"Wake, Penelope, dear child — so you can see
with your own eyes what you have longed for all your days!

Odysseus is here — he has come home — however late.

And he has killed the lordly suitors, the men who plagued
his house, and ate his goods, and bullied his son."
Then watchful-minded Penelope answered her:

"Dear nurse, the gods have made you mad.

The gods can strike
even the full of sense to foolishness,
and set the empty-headed on the road of wisdom:

they have unstrung you.

Your mind was straight before.

Why do you mock me, when my heart is all one grief,
telling wild tales — and shake me out of the sleep,
the sweet sleep that had bound me, folding my eyelids under?

I have not slept so sound since the day Odysseus
went to look on Evil-Ilium, never to be named.

Go on — down with you now, back to the hall.

If any other of my women had come to me
with news like this, and shaken me out of sleep,
I would soon have sent her packing back to the hall
and roughly.

You — your old age spares you that, at least."
Then the dear nurse Eurycleia answered her:

"I do not mock you, dear child.

It is true:

Odysseus is here — he has come home, just as I tell you —
the stranger, the one they all dishonored in the hall.

Telemachus knew long since that he was here,
but kept his father's purposes hidden, cool of head,
till he should punish the violence of those overbearing men."
So she spoke;

and Penelope, all joy, sprang out of bed
and clung to the old woman, tears spilling from her eyelids,
and lifting her voice she spoke winged words to her:

"Come then, dear nurse — tell me truly:

if he has really come home, as you say he has,
how did he lay his hands on the shameless suitors —
one man alone, when they were always in there in a pack?"
Then the dear nurse Eurycleia answered her:

"I did not see, I did not ask.

I heard only the groaning
of men being killed.

We sat in the corner of our strong-built
quarters, struck dumb — the close-fitted doors held us in —
until the hour your son called me out of the hall,
Telemachus:

his father had sent him to call me.

And then I found Odysseus standing among the bodies
of the slain;

and they, around him, on the trodden floor
lay heaped on one another.

It would have warmed your heart —
Now they are all together at the courtyard gates,
and he is purging the beautiful house with sulfur,
and has built a great fire;

and he sent me to call you.

Come with me now — so both of you can set your dear hearts
in the way of gladness at last:

you have suffered so much evil.

Now, this time, the long desire is accomplished:

he has come himself, alive, to his own hearth;

and he has found you
and his son still in the halls;

and the men who wronged him,
the suitors — he has punished them all in his own house."
Then watchful-minded Penelope answered her:

"Dear nurse — no crowing yet.

Hold back your laughter.

You know how welcome the sight of him would be
to everyone in this house — most of all to me and to our son.

But this tale cannot be true, not as you tell it:

no — some one of the immortals has killed the lordly suitors,
outraged at their heart-stinging insolence and their evil deeds.

For they honored nobody on this earth,
bad man or good, whoever came among them;

so through their own blind folly they have suffered.

But Odysseus —
far away he has lost his homecoming, lost out of Achaea;

he himself is lost."
Then the dear nurse Eurycleia answered her:

"My child, what a word has slipped the fence of your teeth!