Your husband is here — at his own hearthside — and you declare
he will never come home!

Your heart was always unbelieving.

Come then — I will give you another sign, and a plain one:

the scar the boar dealt him long ago with its white tusk.

I found it as I washed him, and I wanted to tell you —
you yourself — but he clapped his hand across my mouth
and would not let me speak:

his mind is full of cunning.

But come.

And I will stake my own life on it:

if I am deceiving you, kill me by the most pitiful death there is."
Then watchful-minded Penelope answered her:

"Dear nurse — the counsels of the gods who are forever:

it is hard for you to fathom them, sharp-witted as you are.

But even so, let us go down to my son, so I may see
the suitors dead — and the man who killed them."
So speaking she went down from the upper room;

and her heart
churned:

should she question her dear husband from a distance,
or go to him, and take his head and hands, and kiss them?

And when she came in, and crossed the stone threshold,
she sat down opposite Odysseus, in the light of the fire,
against the other wall.

And he, by the tall pillar,
sat looking at the ground, waiting to learn whether
his strong-built wife would speak to him, once her eyes had seen.

But she sat a long while silent, wonder flooding her heart:

with her eyes now she would gaze at him, full in the face;

now fail to know him — in the bad clothes on his body.

And Telemachus rebuked her, and spoke a word, and named her:

"Mother mine — no mother!

— with your unbending heart,
why do you hold apart from my father so?

Why not
sit close beside him, and question him, and ask him everything?

No other woman would harden her heart like this,
and stand apart from a husband who, after suffering much,
came in the twentieth year to his own fatherland.

But your heart is harder than stone — as it has always been."
Then watchful-minded Penelope answered him:

"My child, the heart in my breast is stunned to stillness:

I cannot speak one word to him, cannot ask a question,
cannot look him in the face.

But if he is truly
Odysseus — if he has come home — then surely we two
shall know one another, and better than anyone:

for we have
signs between us — hidden signs, that we two know and no one else."
So she spoke;

and much-enduring noble Odysseus smiled,
and quickly he spoke winged words to Telemachus:

"Telemachus — let your mother test me in the halls
as she will:

she will soon see more clearly.

Now, because I am filthy, and the clothes on my body are bad,
she holds me cheap, and will not yet say I am the man.

But we — let us think how this can come out best.

For a man who has killed even one man in the land —
one man, with few behind him to avenge him after —
goes into exile, leaving his kin and his fathers' country.

And we have killed the prop of the city — far the noblest
of the young men in Ithaca.

Think on that, I say."
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him:

"You look to it yourself, dear father.

Yours, they say,
is the best mind among mankind:

no mortal man
could set himself against you there.

As for us — we are with you, blazing for it;

and I say we shall not
come short in courage, such strength as is in us."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered him:

"Then I will say how it seems best to me.

First:

bathe yourselves, and put clean tunics on,
and tell the serving-women in the halls to dress;