“Eurymachus, truly my father's return has vanished forever.
Never again shall I trust any message, wherever arising,
nor any prophecy heed that a seer may reveal to my mother
seeks when she summons a prophet and questions him here in the palace.
This man, however, is one of my father's old guest-friends from Taphos;
Mentes he says he is, son of Anchialus, skilled in battle,
and he is lord of the Taphian people who take joy in oar-work.”

Thus spoke Telemachus, knowing within that she was an immortal.
Turning themselves to the dance and the song that awakens desire,
they took delight and continued to wait for the coming of evening.
While they delighted themselves, black evening descended upon them.
Then they departed for sleep, each man to the house that was his own.

But to his chamber Telemachus went, overlooking the splendid
court, constructed high up in a place with a view all around it.
There to his bed he retired, with many concerns in his thinking.
With him a loyal old woman, who carried the fire-blazing torches,
Eurycleia went, daughter of Ops, descended from Peisenor,
whom long ago lord Laertes had bought with the wealth he possessed then,
still in the first of her youth; twenty cattle he paid for the woman.
Just as he honored his faithful wife, so he honored this woman,
never embracing her bed, for he dreaded his own wife's resentment.
She carried blazing torches beside the young prince, and she loved him
more than the other slave women, for she had nursed him in childhood.
Opening wide the two doors of the strongly constructed bedchamber,
there on the bed he sat down and removed the soft folds of his tunic,
casting it into the hands of the wise-minded elderly woman.
Folding the tunic, the woman smoothed out every crease in the fabric,
hung it aloft on a peg by the intricate frame of the bedstead,
then from the chamber went out, pulling shut by the silver door handle
firmly the door, and she drew by its strap the bolt into position.
There through the whole night, wrapped in the choicest fleece of the sheep-flock,
he in his mind and his heart planned the road that Athena had shown him.