Struck with amazement, she went back again to the rooms of her household,
taking to heart the clear-minded speech of the son she had carried.
Up to the chambers aloft she ascended together with handmaids;
there for Odysseus, husband beloved, she wept until slumber
sweetly was cast on her eyelids by gray-eyed goddess Athena.

Meanwhile the suitors were raising a din through the shadowy palace,
every man praying to stretch himself out by the lady in bed there.
Then clear-minded Telemachus started a speech to the suitors:

“Suitors who court my own mother with insolence over all measure,
now for the present let feasting delight us, and let there be no loud
uproar, for beautiful is it to hear such a singer performing,
one who is like the immortals themselves in the sound of his singing.
At the first light, let us go to the assembly and sit there together,
all of us, so I may speak my declaration to you without hiding:
get from my halls and attend to your feasts in the houses of others,
eating your own possessions and changing from one house to another.
But if it seems to your hearts to be better and more advantageous,
one man's livelihood wasting away without making repayment,
ravage it still; but I shall appeal to the gods everlasting,
hoping that Zeus may allow retributive deeds to befall you:
then in this house you would die, and not one of you gain compensation.”

Thus he addressed them; they all bit their lips in their anger and marveled,
hearing Telemachus speak with such courage and boldness before them.
Then in reply came Antinous, son of Eupeithes, and spoke thus:

“Telemachus, gods themselves must be teaching you now to be lofty,
making your speeches with such an audacious and confident spirit.
Never may Cronos' son make you king in the sea-circled island,
Ithaca, even though this is your right by descent from your father.”

Then in reply clear-minded Telemachus spoke and addressed him:

“Will you take anger, Antinous, hearing the words I shall tell you?
Even this kingship I gladly would take if Zeus freely then gave it.
Do you assert that to be the worst fate that can come among mankind?
There is no evil in kingship; immediately wealth fills the household,
honor attaches as well to the man and increases around him.
Yet there are certainly other Achaean kings in abundance,
here on the sea-circled island of Ithaca, younger and older;
one may take kingship among them, because great Odysseus perished.
I shall remain, though, the lord of our household and all its possessions,
also the lord of the slaves godlike Odysseus won for my keeping.”

Eurymachus, son of Polybus, answered the prince in return then:

“Telemachus, surely these matters repose on the knees of the godhead:
who of Achaeans shall rule as the king of the sea-circled Ithaca.
May you yourself keep possessions and govern the halls of your household.
Never may any man come who by violence strips you unwilling
of your possessions while Ithaca still is a land full of people.
Still, my good man, I desire to inquire of the stranger who came here:
Whence was this man, and what was the country he claimed as his homeland?
Where were his people, and where his ancestral plowlands that bore him?
Did he perhaps bring a message announcing your father's returning,
or was some private necessity bringing him here to your household?
How in a moment he sprang and was gone, never waiting for others
to know him better! In no way, indeed, was he base in his features.”

Then in reply clear-minded Telemachus spoke and addressed him: