Into the hall came the arrogant suitors and each in his order
seated himself on the benches and high-backed chairs at the tables.
Heralds poured water for handwashing over the hands of the suitors,
slave women carried the bread and piled it in baskets beside them,
young men filled every great mixing bowl to the brim with the wine draught.
They reached out eagerly then for the good things arrayed there before them.
After desire for food and for drinking had left them contented,
other concerns then arose in the hearts of the arrogant suitors:
music and dancing, the shining adornments that finish a banquet.
One herald carried the beautiful lyre to the hands of Phemius,
forced into singing before the assembled suitors, unwilling.
Touching the lyre strings, he lifted his voice and began the fine singing.

Meanwhile Telemachus spoke to the gray-eyed goddess Athena,
leaning his head very close, so the other men could not perceive it:

“Dear guest, will you take offense at the word I am going to tell you?
These men take pleasure in nothing but music and song and enjoyment,
easily eating another man's livelihood, free of repayment—
one whose white bones have been rotting in rain on the shore of a mainland,
or in the sea as the wave rolls over and under and round them.
If they could witness the man once again making Ithaca homeward,
all of them then would be praying their feet to be faster and lighter,
rather than praying for greater abundance of raiment and gold wealth.
Now he has perished instead by an evil doom, and no longer
have we a comfort, although some mortal arising should tell us
he will return, for the light of the day of his homecoming perished.
Come, though, and tell me the following things, and recount them with candor:
Who among men are you? Where are the city and parents who bore you?
What kind of vessel delivered you here, and in what way did sailors
bring you to Ithaca? What was the people they boasted they came from?
Surely I cannot imagine you came to this island on footpaths.
Tell me another thing also with truth, so that I may discern it:
is this the first time you visit, or were you my father's old guest-friend?
Many indeed were the other men who came into our household,
since he himself went visiting widely among human peoples.”

Answering him once again was the gray-eyed goddess Athena: