“Stranger, the words you are speaking reveal your affectionate purpose,
just like a father addressing a son; I shall always remember.
Come, though, and stay here awhile, although you are pressed for your journey,
so you may bathe and refresh your own spirit with pleasure before you,
holding a gift, take your way to the ship with delight in your spirit,
something of great value, beautiful, fit to be kept as your treasure,
given by me, such a gift as beloved guest-friends give to guest-friends.”

Then in reply spoke the gray-eyed goddess Athena directly:

“Do not detain me now longer, for greatly I long for the roadway.
As for the gift, whatsoever your heart and your spirit would give me,
give it to me when I come once again, to be carried back homeward,
choosing a beautiful gift, and its worthy exchange shall be yours then.”

Speaking these words, the gray-eyed Athena departed and vanished,
flying away like a bird through a roof vent; but into his spirit
she had implanted a force and a courage, recalled to his memory
more of his father than ever before. When he noticed the god-work,
wonder and awe filled his spirit; he knew she had been a divinity.
Straightway he went to the suitors again, like a god in his aspect.

There the renowned singer sang while the suitors in silence were seated,
listening close; he was singing the grievous Achaean returning
homeward from Troy, the calamity Pallas Athena had laid on them.
High in her rooms, meanwhile, she attended the god-given music—
she was Penelope, wise-minded daughter of lord Icarius.
Down from the uppermost room of her house she descended the high stair,
not by herself; two maidservants followed beside and behind her.
When she arrived at the suitors, divine among all mortal women,
stood by the pillar supporting the roof of the solid-built palace,
holding her shining veil as a screen for the front of her two cheeks.
One trusted handmaid was standing to either side of the lady.
Weeping, she turned to the godlike singer and spoke to him gently:

“Phemius, many enchantments you know for the ears of us mortals,
deeds of immortals and men, which the singers make famous in story.
Sing them another of these as you sit, while the suitors in silence
drink of their wine; but cease from performing this sorrowful song now,
bitter and cruel, which always is wearing the heart in my bosom,
since unforgettable sorrow has fallen on me beyond others.
Such is the head that I long for, remembering it without ceasing,
that of the man whose renown fills Hellas and Argos between them.”

Then in reply clear-minded Telemachus spoke and addressed her:

“Mother of mine, why begrudge the reliable singer his pleasure,
giving delight in the way that his spirit impels? Not the singers
cause this, but Zeus is the cause, who bestows upon bread-eating mortals
what he desires, to each man separately, just as he chooses.
No indignation is due him for singing the Danaans' ill fate;
mortals give greatest renown to the song most newly arisen
when it is heard. Let the heart and the spirit within you be steadfast.
Let your own heart and your spirit be bold to endure it and listen:
not by Odysseus only was homecoming lost there at Troyland;
many indeed were the other men also who perished beside him.
Go to your chambers again and attend to the work that awaits you,
loom and the distaff, and order the maids to be busy about their
work; speech shall be the concern of the men, every man, and among them
me above all, for the power is mine in the halls of the household.”