“Shame! You are greatly in need of Odysseus, far now and absent,
so he could set his two hands on the shameless and arrogant suitors.
Would that returning Odysseus now stood in front of the doorway,
holding his helmet and shield and a pair of his bronze-pointed war-spears,
just as he was when I first came to know him and saw him among us,
there in our household, enjoying the feast and delighting in wine cups,
coming from Ephyra, visiting Ilus, the son of Mermerus—
there had Odysseus traveled as well in a swift-running vessel,
seeking a man-killing poison with which he intended to cover
bronze-headed arrows. But Ilus refused him the poison he sought there,
fearing the gods who remain ever living. My father, however,
gave him the poison, because he exceedingly loved great Odysseus.
Would that Odysseus now in such guise could encounter the suitors!
Swift would their doom be and bitter the wedding they hope to accomplish.
Yet all of this is at rest on the knees of the gods in their council,
whether he comes and repays them at home, or the gods do not grant it.
You, though, I urge to consider with care and discover a method
how you can drive these suitors away from the halls of your household.
Come now, attend and give heed to the words I shall speak in your hearing:
tomorrow call all the long-haired Achaeans to meet in assembly,
speak your declaration there before all, and let gods be your witnesses.
Order the suitors to scatter themselves, each man to his household.
As for your mother, if marriage is stirring the heart in her bosom,
let her return to the mighty ancestral house of her father.
There they shall make her a marriage and ready the gifts for the bride-price,
many and splendid, as fitting the daughter her father holds dearest.
For you yourself I have careful advice, if only you heed me:
fit out the best of the ships you can find with a twenty-man oar-crew,
go and inquire for your father, so long from his people departed.
Maybe a mortal will tell you, or maybe you hear a god's Rumor,
born out of Zeus, which above other things carries glory to mortals.
First you must go into Pylos and question the godlike old Nestor,
afterward travel to Sparta and visit the golden-haired warlord,
King Menelaus, the last to return of the bronze-armored Argives.
If you receive any word your father is living and homebound,
then, though distressed and diminished, endure for another whole year still.
If they should tell you instead he is dead and no longer among them,
come once again to the land of your fathers, the country you cherish,
heap him a tomb and perform at the tomb every rite of the dead man,
many and splendid, as fitting, then give your own mother a husband.
After you finally carry to action and finish these duties,
then with your heart and your mind take counsel and fashion a method
how in the halls of your household to kill every suitor assembled,
whether by cunning or openly. You must no longer be playing
childish and foolish games; you have now outgrown such behavior.
Have you not heard what magnificent fame great Orestes has gathered
everywhere out among mortals because he destroyed the man-killer,
crooked Aegisthus, the murderer who slew his famous own father?
You, my dear friend—for I see you are very well grown and fine-looking—
must become brave, so that late generations will speak of you nobly.
Now I shall go to the swift-running ship and descend to the seashore,
back to my comrades, who must be exceedingly troubled by waiting.
All of these things are your charge; give heed to the words I have spoken.”

Then in reply clear-minded Telemachus spoke and addressed her: