“Father of all, son of Cronos, supreme among those who have power,
truly that man has been laid in the ruin that he had deserved there.
Thus may another be ruined, whoever accomplishes such things.
Yet for Odysseus, battle-wise, deep in me smolders a heartache—
ill-fated man, who has suffered so long far away from his loved ones,
held on an island wave-washed, at the navel and heart of the sea-depths,
thick-grown with trees, where a goddess inhabits a house in the forest,
daughter of Atlas, that baneful intelligence, Atlas who fathoms
every abyss of the sea and alone holds upright the towering
columns that keep the broad heaven and earth forever apart.
Daughter of Atlas it is who restrains the despairing Odysseus,
always beguiling his spirit with words that are gentle and cunning,
hoping that Ithaca fades from his mind. But the heart of Odysseus
longs to behold even smoke as it rises aloft from his homeland;
longing to die is upon him. Yet even your heart is not moved now,
god of Olympus! Did not this Odysseus win your approval,
making you offerings there by the ships of the Argives at Troyland?
Why are you holding such wrath against great Odysseus, Zeus-father?”

Zeus who assembles the cloud banks answered Athena's complaint then:

“Child of my being, what word has escaped from the fence of your teeth now?
How could I ever forget the resourceful, godlike Odysseus,
first among mortals in counsel and first in the gifts that he offers
all to the deathless gods who possess the expanses of heaven?
No, but Poseidon who girdles the earth is unending in anger,
wrathful because of the Cyclops whose eye that Odysseus blinded,
he, Polyphemus the godlike, is mightiest far of the Cyclopes.
Mother Thoösa, the nymph, bore him—she was daughter of Phorcys,
Phorcys, the lord of the fathomless salt sea—she was his daughter,
she in the hollow caves had embraced the earth-shaking Poseidon.
Ever since then, the earth-shaking lord Poseidon Odysseus
does not destroy, but he drives him afar from the land of his fathers.
Come, let us all now consider together and fashion his homeward
journey and how he may come. Then Poseidon will put down his anger;
never alone can he strive and contend with the will of us all here,
one against every immortal god, in despite of our purpose.”

Then in reply spoke the gray-eyed goddess Athena directly:

“Father of all, son of Cronos, supreme among those who have power,
if this is truly the pleasure at last of the blessed immortals,
homeward to send the resourceful Odysseus into his household,
Hermes the guide and the keen-sighted slayer of Argus, dispatch him
straight to Ogygia's island, and send him with greatest swiftness
there to announce to the nymph with the beautiful hair our decision:
steadfast Odysseus must be released and begin his returning.
I shall descend into Ithaca, there to approach his own son and
stir him to greater endeavor and put a new strength in his spirit,
calling to council the long-haired Achaeans assembled together,
there to renounce all the suitors, the men who are day after day now
slaughtering thick-thronging sheep and the shambling and crook-horned cattle.
Then I shall send him to Sparta and onward to sand-covered Pylos,
seeking report of his dear father's homecoming, if he may hear it,
so that an excellent fame among mortals may rise and possess him.”
