Yet there is no concealing the greedy insatiable belly,
cursed thing, which gives many troubles and evils to mortals;

because of it even the ships with good benches are fitted
out on the barren sea, bringing ruin and harm to opponents.”
So the two of them spoke such things to each other together.

Then a dog lying there raised up his head and his ears in attention,
Argus, the dog of long-suffering great-hearted King Odysseus,
whom once he himself had reared, but enjoyed him not, since before that
off he had gone to sacred Ilios.

In the old days the young men
used to lead him to hunt wild goats and deer and the hares there.

Now he lay cast aside, with his master away and departed,
on a great heap of dung that was poured there before the outer doors, from
mules and from cattle in plenty, until the servants of Odysseus
carried it off to manure the broad field of their absent master.

There lay Argus the dog, all covered with swarming dog-ticks.

Then, when he noticed Odysseus standing there near him at last, he
wagged his tail and flattened both ears, but no longer had power
now to come any nearer and reach his own master before him.

But Odysseus, turning away, wiped off a tear that had risen,
easily hiding it from Eumaeus, and asked him a question:

“Eumaeus, this is a wonder indeed, this dog on the dung-heap.

Fine is the shape of his body, though this much I cannot determine,
whether he also was swift in his running, to match that appearance,
or was merely the sort of dogs that attend at men's tables,
such as their masters keep and take care of for ornament only.”
Then in reply you spoke, Eumaeus, swineherd and loyal:

“This is indeed the dog of a man who died far from his homeland.

If he were still such in his build and in all of his actions
as when Odysseus, departing to Troy, went away and left him,
quickly you would marvel to see his speed and his great strength.

Never did any beast that he chased in the deep of the woodland
get away from him;

he was skillful beyond all others in tracking.

But now he is gripped by misery;

and his lord in a foreign land perished,
far from his home, and the heedless women do not care for him.

Slaves, when no longer their masters maintain and uphold their dominion,
no longer then are they willing to labor as duty commands them.

Zeus of the thunderous voice takes away one half of the valor
out of a man, on the day when the yoke of his slavery takes him.”
So he spoke, and entered the house where people were dwelling in comfort,
and he went straight through the hall to the midst of the splendid suitors.

Then for Argus the fate of black death came over and seized him,
just when at last he had looked on Odysseus, now in the twentieth year.

Him then first of them all godlike Telemachus noticed,
seeing the swineherd come down through the house, and quickly thereafter
nodded and called him near;

and he, glancing around him, took up a footstool
lying there, where the carver of meat used to sit in the banquet,
sharing out many portions of flesh to the suitors who feasted through the household.

This he carried and set by the table of young Telemachus,
facing it;

and there he himself sat down.

Then the herald
took up a portion and placed it before him, lifting bread from the basket.

Close behind him after that entered Odysseus the hero,
like to a beggar, a miserable old man and a graybeard,
leaning upon his staff;

and foul clothes covered his body.

Then he sat on the threshold of ash wood, inside the doorway,
leaning against a cypress post, which long ago some craftsman
smoothed with skill in his work and had made it straight by the line-rule.