Then Telemachus afterward passed through the hall and went outward,
holding his spear;

and together with him went two swift dogs also.

Wondrous grace then Athena poured out over him in abundance,
and all of the people gazed upon him in wonder as he came there.

Round him the haughty suitors assembled themselves in a circle,
speaking fair words, but devising dark evils deep in their spirits.

But he then turned aside from the thick press and tumult among them,
going where Mentor sat, and Antiphus, and Halitherses,
men who from the beginning had been his father’s companions.

There he went and sat down, and they questioned him over each matter.

Then to them came near Piraeus, renowned for the spear in battle,
leading the guest through the town to the place of assembly;

nor long then
did Telemachus stay apart from the guest, but stood beside him.

And Piraeus was first to address him and speak out, saying:

“Telemachus, quickly now send some women along to my dwelling,
so I may send you the gifts that Menelaus gave to you.”
Then in turn clear-headed Telemachus answered him, saying:

“Piraeus, we do not yet know how these matters will issue.

If in my halls the haughty suitors should secretly kill me,
and divide all my father’s possessions among them in portions,
I would have you enjoy them yourself, rather than any of those men;

but if against these men I shall plant bloody death and destruction,
then bring them home to my house with gladness, and I shall be gladdened.”
So he spoke, and led the much-enduring stranger on to the household.

But when they had come to the halls where the family dwelt in comfort,
first they laid down their cloaks on the benches and carved chairs there,
then stepped into polished bathing-tubs and bathed their bodies.

And when the serving-women had bathed them and rubbed them with olive,
and had cast round them thick warm cloaks and tunics upon them,
out from the baths they stepped and seated themselves on the benches.

Then a maidservant brought them water and poured from a pitcher
over a silver basin, from a beautiful vessel of gold there,
so they might wash;

and beside them she drew up a polished table.

Then the grave housekeeper brought in bread and set it before them,
placing many good things beside it, giving freely from what was there.

Over against them his mother sat down by the pillar of the hall there,
leaning back in her chair and twisting the fine-spun wool with her fingers.

Then they reached out their hands to the good things laid ready before them.

But when they had cast from them the desire for drink and for eating,
then prudent Penelope first began speaking among them:

“Telemachus, I for my part shall go up to my upper chamber
and lie down upon that bed which has been made for my grieving,
always befouled with the tears that are mine, from the hour when Odysseus
went with the sons of Atreus away to Ilios;

yet you could not bear,
before the overbearing suitors came back into this house here,
to tell me clearly your father’s return, if perhaps you had heard it.”
Then wise Telemachus answered his mother and spoke in return thus:

“Therefore, my mother, to you I shall tell the whole truth of the matter.

We went to Pylos, to Nestor, the shepherd and ruler of peoples.

He received me there in his lofty halls with all loving-kindness,
and cherished me warmly, just as a father cherishes his own son
come after long absence from elsewhere back home in his youth there;

so he took loving care of me, with his sons renowned beside him.

Yet of Odysseus steadfast in heart he declared that never
had he heard any word, whether living or dead, from earth’s people.

But onward he sent me to Atreus’ son, to Menelaus spear-famed,
with horses to draw me, and with a close-jointed chariot also.