When the Dawn had appeared, the early-born rose-fingered goddess,
then under his feet he bound on the beautiful sandals,
Telemachus, dear-loved son of the godlike Odysseus,
and he took up the stout spear, well fitted into his palm there,
eager to go to the town, and he spoke to his swineherd, saying:

“Old father, now I am going to town, so that my mother
may set eyes on me;

for I do not think she will ever
cease from her grim lamentation and tear-laden mourning
till she has seen me myself.

But to you I give this charge now.

Lead this unhappy stranger to town, so that once he is there
he may beg for his meal;

and whoever is willing will give him
morsel of bread and a cup.

It is no way possible for me
to put up with all men, when griefs are upon my own spirit.

If the stranger is deeply angered, the worse it will be for him.

For indeed it is dear to me to speak out truth without hiding.”
Then resourceful Odysseus in answer spoke back to him, saying:

“My dear friend, I myself have no wish to be held back either.

Better it is for a beggar to beg for his meal in the city
rather than out in the fields;

and whoever is willing will give me.

For I am no longer so young that I should remain at the cattle-stalls
and in all things obey whatever an overseer tells me.

But go on;

and this man here, the one whom you are commanding,
will lead me, once I have warmed by the fire and daylight has come there.

For these garments I have are miserably poor;

do not let the
morning frost overcome me;

and you say the town lies far off.”
So he spoke, and Telemachus went through the yard of the farmstead,
striding swiftly with his feet, and sowing evils for suitors.

But when he came to the house well built and fitly inhabited,
there he stood up his spear as he carried it by a tall pillar,
and he himself went within and crossed the threshold of stone there.

Him the first one by far to perceive was the nurse Eurycleia,
as she was spreading soft fleeces upon the elaborate chairs there.

Then with tears she came straight toward him, and around him the others,
women enslaved of Odysseus, enduring of spirit, were gathered,
and with affection they kissed his head and both of his shoulders.

Out from her chamber then came circumspect-minded Penelope,
like to Artemis, or like to golden Aphrodite,
and weeping she cast her arms all around her beloved son’s body,
and she kissed his head and both the bright beautiful eyes there,
and in lamentation she spoke to him winged words, saying:

“You have come, Telemachus, sweet light.

I truly had never
thought I should look upon you again, when by ship you had journeyed
secretly off to Pylos, against my desire, for tidings
of your dear father.

But come now, tell me whatever you witnessed.”
Then in turn clear-headed Telemachus answered her, saying:

“Mother, do not awaken my weeping, nor stir up my heart more
here in my breast, when I have but escaped a sheer destruction.

Rather, go bathe yourself, and take clean garments upon you,
then with your serving women go up to the upper chamber,
and pray to all the gods that you will offer complete hecatombs
if perhaps Zeus may ever accomplish requital in actions.

But I shall go to the place of assembly, so I may summon
the guest who came hither with me as I traveled back from that country.

Him I sent on ahead with my comrades equal to immortals,
and instructed Piraeus to take him along to his dwelling
and to treat him with kindness and honor until I have come there.”
So then he spoke, and for her his word became wingless and silent.

She then bathed herself, and took clean garments upon her body,
and she prayed to all the gods that she would offer complete hecatombs
if perhaps Zeus might ever accomplish requital in actions.