But when he had stepped past the threshold, Penelope called to him:

“You do not bring him, Eumaeus.

What has the wanderer minded?

Has he perhaps taken fear of someone outrageous, or otherwise
feels shame here in the house?

Yet a shamefaced beggar is worthless.”
Then in reply you answered her, Eumaeus the swineherd:

“What he has said is fitting, as any man else also
would think, while he seeks to avoid the outrage of haughty men.

He bids you remain till the time when the sun has gone under.

And for you also yourself it is better by far, my queen, thus:

to speak to the stranger alone, and alone to hear his answer.”
Then the wise-hearted Penelope answered him, saying:

“The stranger is no fool;

he surmises how matters may happen.

For I think there are not such men among mortal people,
men so insolent, plotting deeds so reckless and wicked.”
So she spoke thus;

and the noble swineherd then went on his way there
into the throng of the suitors, when all had been told and made clear.

Then at once he spoke winged words to Telemachus softly,
leaning his head in close, so the others might not overhear him:

“Dear friend, I am going away, to guard the swine and the matters
there, your livelihood and my own;

let all here be your concern now.

First keep watch over yourself and preserve your own person;

see that nothing befalls you;

for many Achaeans are plotting
evil;

may Zeus destroy them before they bring ruin upon us.”
Then resourceful Telemachus answered him in return:

“It shall be so, old father;

but go when you have supped at evening.

Then at dawn come again, and bring noble victims for slaughter;

all the rest shall be cared for by me and the deathless immortals.”
So he spoke, and the other sat down again on the polished seat there,
and when he had filled up his heart with eating and drinking,
he went on his way to the swine, and left the enclosure and hall there,
full of the banqueters;

they were delighting in dance and in singing,
for now at last the day had already declined into evening.