There I saw Argive Helen, because of whom many in hardship
Argives and Trojans alike had suffered, by will of the immortals.

Straightway then Menelaus, good in the battle-cry, questioned me,
asking for what need I had come to glorious Lacedaemon.

And I told him in turn the whole truth exactly and fully.

Then he answered me back, and spoke to me in these winged words:

“Out upon them, that they should desire to lie in the bed of
such a strong-hearted man, being themselves but weaklings and cowards.

As when amid a thicket the hind of a powerful lion
lays down her tender young fawns, newborn and still needing milk there,
then goes to graze over mountain-spurs and grassy hollows,
but he comes back again to the bed that is his in the thicket
and upon both alike lets loose an unspeakably shameful destruction,
so will Odysseus on them let loose an unspeakably shameful destruction.

If only, Father Zeus and Athena and lord Apollo,
he were the man he once was in well-built Lesbos among men,
when he rose at the challenge and wrestled with Philomeleides,
and threw him down with great force, and all of the Achaeans rejoiced there,
being such then, if Odysseus might mix with the suitors among them,
all of them soon would become short-lived and their marriages bitter.

Now as for all that you ask me and earnestly beg me to tell you,
I shall not speak beside the mark, nor turn you aside, nor deceive you.

Whatever the truthful old man of the sea declared and told me,
not one word of that will I hide from you, nor keep it in secret.

He said that he saw him upon an island, afflicted with anguish,
in the halls of the nymph Calypso, who keeps him there by compulsion.

He cannot make his way to the land of his fathers and country;

for there are no well-oared ships there beside him, no comrades
who might convey him over the broad back of the sea on his journey.”
So spoke Atreus’ son, Menelaus, renowned for the ash-spear.

When these things had been finished, I journeyed homeward;

the immortals
gave me a following wind, and quickly they sent me to homeland.”
So he spoke, and the word stirred the heart in the breast within her.

Then in their midst godlike Theoclymenus also addressed them:

“Honored lady, wife of Odysseus, son of Laertes,
truly he does not know it for certain;

but listen now to my saying.

For I shall prophesy to you exactly, and I shall hide nothing.

Let Zeus now know it first among gods, and the table of guest-right,
and the hearth of blameless Odysseus, to which I have now come,
that surely Odysseus is already here in his fatherland’s country,
sitting or moving abroad, and learning of these evil actions;

he is here, and for all of the suitors he plants an evil destruction.

Such was the bird-sign I marked as I sat on the well-benched vessel,
sitting there I discerned it and cried it aloud to Telemachus.”
Then in her turn wise-minded Penelope answered him:

“Ah stranger, if only this word might be brought to fulfillment;

then you would quickly know both my affection and many gifts from me,
given by me, so any man who met you would call you blessed.”
Thus they were speaking such things in turn to one another.

But the suitors before the great hall of Odysseus
took their delight in the discus and in casting of javelins,
there on the level-paved court, where earlier too they were reckless.

But when now it was time for the evening meal, and the sheep came
in from the fields on all sides, and the men drove them, as always,
then among them Medon spoke;

for he was the one of the heralds
who pleased them the most, and attended them there at the feasting:

“Young men, since now all of you have delighted your spirits with contests,
come to the house, so there we may make ready the supper;