may a god never bring that to fulfillment.

Give to him, take it yourself;

I do not begrudge it, I tell you.

So do not trouble my mother with this, nor trouble another
of the thralls in the halls of godlike Odysseus.

No, for that is not the intent that lives in your bosom;

rather you wish to eat it yourself than to give to another.”
Then in return Antinous answered him, saying:

“Telemachus, lofty in speech, ungovernable spirit, what said you?

If all of the suitors should offer him just so much bounty,
then for three months more this house might keep him far from its doorway.”
So he spoke, and lifting the footstool from under the table,
showed the one where he rested his shining feet at the banquet.

But all the rest gave too, and they filled up the beggar’s pouch there
full of bread and of meat;

and now Odysseus was likely
back at the threshold to go and taste of Achaean almsgiving.

But he stopped beside Antinous, and spoke to him, saying:

“Give, my friend;

you do not seem to me the worst of the Achaeans,
but the best;

for truly you have the look of a ruler.

Therefore it is your part to give still more than the others
bread;

and I in return will praise you over the broad earth.

For I too once dwelt in a house among men in abundance,
rich and prosperous, and often I gave to a wanderer,
whatever man he might be and whatever need had brought him.

Very many servants I had, and many possessions besides them,
all by which men live well and are called wealthy among people.

But Zeus son of Cronos destroyed it all, for surely he wished it,
he who sent me along with roving freebooting shipmen
on the long road to Egypt, that there I might perish.

There in the stream of Egypt I halted my curving ships there.

Then indeed I commanded my trusty companions in earnest
there by the ships to remain and to guard the beached vessels,
and I urged men to go as lookouts up to the watchpoints.

But they, yielding to outrage, and following their own force,
quickly began to ravage the beautiful fields of Egyptians;

women they carried away, and little children beside them,
and they slaughtered the men;

and swiftly the cry reached the city.

They, hearing the shouting, came on with the dawn as it brightened;

all of the plain was filled with footmen and horses together,
and with the flash of bronze;

and Zeus who delights in the thunder
cast foul panic among my companions, nor did any man dare
stand and face them in battle;

for evils stood round us on all sides.

There many of us they killed with the edge of the bronze weapon,
and others they led away alive, to labor in bondage.

But me they handed to Cyprus, to one who met them there as a guest-friend,
Dmetor the son of Iasus, who ruled mightily in Cyprus.

From there I have now come here, enduring affliction.”
Then in return Antinous answered and shouted at him:

“What god has brought this pest to us, this nuisance at dinner?

Stand there in the middle, away from my table’s presence,
lest soon you come to a bitter Egypt and bitter Cyprus.

Such a bold and shameless beggar as you are before us!

One after another you stand beside all men, and they give you
lavishly, since there is no restraint and no scruple at all in
giving away what is other men’s, when plenty lies by each person.”
Then withdrawing, resourceful Odysseus spoke to him, saying:

“Ah me, then beauty and sense do not dwell together in you.

You would not give from your own house even salt to your suppliant,
you who now, seated here among goods that belong to another,
could not bring yourself to give me some bread, though so much lies before you.”
So he spoke, and Antinous grew still more angry in spirit;

glaring beneath his brows, he addressed him with winged words: