Then Telemachus called the swineherd close to him and addressed him,
taking a whole loaf out of the finely woven basket,
and some meat, as much as both of his hands could hold when he cupped them:

“Carry these things to the stranger, and tell him also
he should go among all of the suitors and beg from each one there;

shame is no help to a man when need has fallen upon him.”
So he spoke, and the swineherd went when he had heard that order,
and standing close beside him he spoke out winged words in answer:

“Telemachus gives you these, stranger, and bids you also
go among all of the suitors and beg from each one there;

shame, he says, is no good thing for a man who must live by his begging.”
Then resourceful Odysseus in turn made answer and said to him:

“Father Zeus, grant that Telemachus may be prosperous among men,
and may all come to pass that his heart in its longing desires for.”
So he spoke, and received them with both of his hands, and he set them
there before both his feet, on top of his tattered beggar’s wallet,
and he ate while the singer in that great hall was singing his measure.

But when he had finished his meal, then the noble singer fell silent.

Then the suitors made an uproar all through the hall;

and Athena,
standing close by the side of Odysseus, Laertes’ offspring,
urged him on, so that he might collect broken crusts from the suitors
and might learn which men among them were righteous and which were unrighteous.

Yet not even so was she minded to ward off ruin from any.

Then he set out to beg, going rightward from man unto man there,
stretching his hand out everywhere, as though he had begged all his lifetime.

They in pity gave to him, and they marveled greatly to see him,
asking each other who he might be and from where he had come there.

Then among them Melanthius the goatherd spoke out and addressed them:

“Listen to me, you suitors who court our queen of great glory,
speaking of this stranger;

for certainly I have seen him already.

Truly the swineherd was the one who conducted him hither;

but the man’s own stock I do not clearly know, where he claims it.”
So he spoke, and Antinous with harsh words rebuked the swineherd:

“You notorious swineherd, why was it you brought this fellow
here to the town?

Do we not have enough other wandering beggars,
nuisances, miserable men who lick clean the leavings of banquets?

Is it a little thing in your eyes that they squander your master’s
livelihood here as they gather, and now you have invited this one too?”
Then you answered him, Eumaeus, swineherd faithful and noble:

“Antinous, though you are high-born, these are not words finely spoken.

For who ever goes out of his own accord and invites in a stranger,
one from abroad, unless he is one of the craftsmen who serve all:

some seer, or healer of sickness, or builder in timber,
or even a god-taught singer, whose song can delight those who hear him?

Such men indeed are invited over the boundless earth of mortals;

but no man would ask in a beggar to eat up his substance.

You are ever the harshest of all of the suitors assembled
toward the slaves of Odysseus, and especially harsh upon me;

but I care not,
so long as prudent Penelope still lives here in the palace,
and so long as godlike Telemachus lives here beside her.”
Then sagacious Telemachus answered him face-to-face, saying:

“Be quiet;

do not answer this fellow at length with your speeches.

Antinous always delights in provoking men viciously,
using hard words, and he even urges the others to do it.”
So he spoke, and then to Antinous he addressed winged words:

“Antinous, how nobly you care for me, just as a father
cares for his son, when you order me now to drive from my hall this
stranger by force of command;