As when a man gazes entranced at a singer before him,
one who by gift of the gods has learned songs full of longing for mortals,
and men insatiably yearn to keep hearing, whenever he sings them,
so that man there enthralled me as he sat in my dwelling and told me.

He declares that he is a guest-friend linked to Odysseus’ father,
living in Crete, where the lineage and house of Minos are rooted.

Thence indeed he has now come here, after suffering many afflictions,
rolled and driven from place to place;

and he says he has heard tell
that Odysseus is near, in the rich land of the Thesprotian people,
living, and bringing much treasure along with him home to this household.”
Then circumspect Penelope answered and spoke to him again:

“Go then, call him here, so he himself may tell me the story.

As for these men, let them sit at the doors and amuse themselves,
or else here through the house, since the heart in them is lighthearted.

Their own possessions lie there in their homes all unharmed and unravaged,
grain and sweet wine;

their own house-servants consume these things there,
while they keep swarming daily into our house here without ceasing,
slaughtering cattle and sheep and the fat well-fattened she-goats,
feasting and drinking the flashing wine in extravagant folly.

Wastefully so, and much of our substance is all disappearing,
since there is no man such as Odysseus was, to defend this household.

But if Odysseus should come and attain to his fatherland’s country,
then with his son he would swiftly repay these men for their outrage.”
So she spoke, and Telemachus gave a great sneeze, and around him
terribly all the house rang out;

and Penelope laughed then,
and quickly she spoke winged words to Eumaeus and addressed him:

“Go now for me, and summon the stranger to stand here before me.

Do you not see how my son has just sneezed upon all my saying?

Therefore the death of the suitors will not be left unaccomplished,
every one of them all;

not one shall escape death and destruction.

And I will tell you something besides;

do you store it within you:

if I perceive that he tells me the truth in all things exactly,
I will clothe him in cloak and tunic, fine garments to wear there.”
Thus she spoke, and the swineherd departed when he heard her commandment,
and standing near at his side he addressed him in winged words, saying:

“Stranger, old father, circumspect Penelope summons you inward,
mother of Telemachus;

her heart bids her ask you some questions
about her husband, though she herself is afflicted with sorrows.

And if she finds that all you tell her is wholly truthful,
she will clothe you in cloak and tunic, which things above all things
you are in need of;

but food you may beg through the people
and so sustain your belly;

whoever is willing will give it.”
Then much-enduring noble Odysseus answered and said to him:

“Eumaeus, I could at once tell all things truly and clearly
to the daughter of Icarius, wary-minded Penelope;

for I know that man well;

we have both borne one common affliction.

But I fear the throng of these bitter and violent suitors,
whose outrage and brutal force rise up to the iron heaven.

Even just now, when that man, as I passed through the chamber,
struck me and gave me pain, though I had done no harm whatever,
neither Telemachus checked him in that, nor any other.

Therefore bid Penelope stay within the halls and wait there,
though she is eager, until the time when the sun has gone under;

then let her ask me concerning her husband’s day of returning,
seating me nearer the fire;

for the clothing upon me
is wretched;

you know it yourself, since first I entreated you.”
So he spoke, and the swineherd went when he had heard the saying.