if he comes to the house of godlike Odysseus,
many footstools around his head from the hands of men in the hall there
will scrape all his ribs as he is struck and flung through the dwelling.”
So he spoke, and in passing, in witlessness, kicked with his foot at
Odysseus’ hip;

but he did not knock him away from the pathway.

He stood firm and secure;

and Odysseus pondered within him
whether rushing upon him he should with the staff take his spirit,
or lifting him high by the middle should smash his head on the earth there.

But he endured and held himself in with the strength of his spirit.

Then the swineherd, seeing him there, rebuked him and prayed with hands lifted:

“Nymphs of the spring, daughters of Zeus, if ever Odysseus
burned for you thigh-pieces, swathed over thickly with glistening fat there,
out of young lambs and kids, then grant me this prayer that I long for,
so that the man himself may return, and a god lead him homeward;

then he would scatter all of your splendors and swagger to nothing,
all that you flaunt in your insolence now as you wander forever
all through the town;

and the flocks are destroyed by the wickedly faithless men.”
Then in reply spoke Melanthius, goatherd and master of she-goats:

“Dear me, what a thing the dog said, full of ruinous cunning!

Him on a black ship fitted with benches one day I shall carry
far away out of Ithaca, so he may earn me rich profit.

If only Apollo the archer with silver bow would strike Telemachus
down in the hall this day, or the suitors subdue and destroy him,
just as Odysseus has lost far away his day of returning.”
So he spoke, and he left them there as they slowly kept coming;

but he himself strode on, and swiftly he came to his master's dwelling.

Straightway he went inside, and sat down among all the suitors,
facing Eurymachus there, for he loved him most among all men.

Those who were serving set down by his side his portion of meat there,
and the revered housekeeper brought him bread and set it beside him
there for his eating.

Then close by came noble Odysseus
and the divine swineherd and halted;

around them there drifted
out the sound of the hollowed lyre, for Phemius started his singing.

Then Odysseus, taking the swineherd's hand, addressed him and said thus:

“Eumaeus, surely these are the beautiful halls of Odysseus,
easy indeed to distinguish and know when seen among many.

One part joins on to another, and all of the court has been finished
there with a wall and coping;

the well-made doors are double;

no man alive could lightly break through and plunder the place here.

I can tell that within it a great host of men are feasting,
since the smell of roast meat mounts up, and the lyre in the house sounds,
that lyre which the gods have ordained as companion of banquets.”
Then in reply you spoke, Eumaeus, swineherd and loyal:

“You marked it with ease, since in other things too you are not witless.

Come then, let us consider how all of this business shall happen.

Either you go in first to the well-inhabited dwelling,
slipping among the suitors, while I remain here behind you;

or if you wish it, stay here, and I shall go onward before you.

Only do not delay very long, lest someone should see you
standing outside and should strike you or pelt you;

on this I advise you.”
Then much-enduring noble Odysseus answered him, saying:

“I know it, I understand;

you are urging a man who has thought it.

You go onward before me, and I shall remain here behind you.

I am not inexperienced in blows and in things men throw at me;

steadfast is the heart in me, since I have suffered so many
sorrows in waves and in war;

let this too come after the others.