“Now I no longer suppose you will go from the hall here
back in good fashion, since now you have dared to utter insults.”
So he spoke, and lifting the footstool he struck his right shoulder,
low on the back by the spine;

but he stood there fixed like a boulder,
steadfast, nor did the missile of proud Antinous shake him;

silently only he moved his head, deep plotting of evils.

Then back to the threshold he went and sat down, and beside him
set the well-filled pouch, and spoke out among the suitors:

“Hear me, you suitors of our far-famed queen and princess,
so I may speak what the heart in my breast bids me utter.

There is no pain in the mind, nor any grief worth mentioning,
when a man is struck while he fights for his own possessions,
whether for cattle or else for his white-fleeced sheep in the pasture.

But Antinous struck me because of my wretched belly,
ruinous thing, which gives so many sorrows to mortals.

Yet if indeed there are gods and avenging Furies for beggars,
may death overtake Antinous before he comes to his marriage.”
Then in return Antinous, Eupeithes’ son, answered him:

“Sit there in silence and eat, stranger, or else go elsewhere,
lest for such words as these the young men drag you through the hallways,
either by foot or by hand, and tear all the flesh from your body.”
So he spoke, and the rest were all deeply indignant against him.

Thus would a man among those overweening young suitors say:

“Antinous, that was not fair, to strike the poor wandering beggar,
reckless man, if perhaps indeed he is one of the gods from the heavens.

Even the gods, in the likeness of strangers from alien countries,
taking all kinds of forms, keep passing through cities of mortals,
watching the lawless violence there, and the good rule of people.”
So spoke the suitors;

but he gave no heed at all to their saying.

But in his heart Telemachus fostered a mighty sorrow
for the blow;

yet he did not let one tear fall down from his eyelids,
but in silence he shook his head, while pondering evils in darkness.

But when circumspect Penelope heard of the stranger’s affliction,
how he had been struck in the hall, then she said to her women:

“May famed Apollo the archer so strike you yourself, Antinous.”
Then the housekeeper Eurynome answered and spoke in response there:

“If only our prayers might come to fulfilment and ending,
none of these men would come to the fair-throned Dawn in the morning.”
Then circumspect Penelope answered and spoke to her again:

“Nurse, they are enemies all, since all of them scheme us destruction;

but Antinous most of all is like to black death in his spirit.

Some poor unhappy stranger goes wandering through the great house here,
begging from man after man, for hard need drives him onward;

all the others filled his wallet and each one gave him something,
but he with a footstool struck the base of the man’s right shoulder.”
Thus she spoke among all her serving women there in the chamber,
seated within;

meanwhile noble Odysseus was eating his supper.

Then calling the noble swineherd to stand by, she spoke to him saying:

“Go now, noble Eumaeus, and bid the stranger come upward
here, so that I may address him and ask him some questions,
whether he has heard of stout-hearted Odysseus anywhere,
or saw him with his own eyes;

he seems like one long storm-driven.”
Then answering her, you spoke, Eumaeus, swineherd and good man:

“If only, my queen, the Achaeans would keep themselves silent,
then what he tells would surely enchant your own dear spirit.

For three nights I had him with me, and three days I detained him
there in my hut, for he first came to me after fleeing a vessel.

Yet still he has not brought to an end all the woes he recounts there.