for there is nothing worse in taking a meal at due season.”
So he spoke, and they rose up and went, obeying his saying.

But when they had come to the house that was nobly inhabited,
then they laid down their cloaks on the benches and chairs in the hall there,
and they slaughtered great sheep and the fattened and flourishing goats,
and they slaughtered rich swine and a heifer brought in from the cattle,
making the feast ready.

Meanwhile from the country toward townward
noble Odysseus and the godlike swineherd were hastening.

Then the swineherd began the discourse, that captain of people:

“Stranger, since now indeed you are eager to go to the city
today, as my master commanded me—though for my own part
I would prefer you remained here as warden to guard the farm buildings;

but I respect him and fear him, lest afterward he should reproach me;

harsh indeed are the scoldings that come from the mouths of our masters.

But come now, let us go;

for the day has advanced the most part,
and soon toward the evening I think it will turn to more bitter cold for you.”
Then resourceful Odysseus in answer addressed him and said:

“I know it, I understand;

you command one who thinks on these matters.

But come, let us go;

and do you lead onward the whole way before me.

Give me a staff as well, if somewhere you have one already cut,
for support, since you say that the road is not easy for foot-travel.”
So he spoke, and about his shoulders he slung the unsightly beggar’s pouch,
thick-patched and tattered, and on it a twisted cord served as shoulder-strap.

Then Eumaeus placed in his hand a staff that well pleased him.

So the two of them went;

and the dogs and the herdsmen remained there
staying behind by the stead, while he led his master townward,
like to a beggar in misery, like to an aged man also,
leaning upon his staff;

and sorry garments were wrapped on his body.

But when as they strode on their way down the rugged footpath
they were now near the town and came to the spring of the people,
well-built and fair in its flow, where the townsmen drew their water,
which Ithacus made, and Neritus, and also Polyctor,
and around it there stood a grove of water-fed poplar trees there,
circling it round on all sides, and the cold water streamed down beneath them
from high on the rock;

and above was fashioned an altar
for the nymphs, where all wayfaring men would offer libation.

There the son of Dolius, Melanthius, came up and met them,
driving the goats that surpassed all the flocks of the goatherds,
meant as a meal for the suitors;

and two herdsmen followed beside him.

Seeing the two, he reviled them and spoke and called each by name there,
speaking outrageous and shameful words;

and he stirred up Odysseus’ spirit:

“Now then indeed the utterly base is leading the base one before him;

always the god brings like to like and joins each fellow to fellow.

Where are you taking this belly-slave, most miserable swineherd,
this troublesome beggar, this scavenger haunting the banquets,
one who by many doorposts will stand and rub both his shoulders,
begging for scraps, not asking for swords nor asking for cauldrons?

If you would give him to me to become the keeper of sheepfolds,
and to sweep out the pens and carry green fodder to young kids,
then perhaps by drinking whey he might put some flesh on his thigh there.

But since indeed he has learned only evil and worthless behaviors,
he will not choose to go near to work, but cringing through the city
wants by begging to feed his insatiable belly forever.

But I will tell you this, and the thing will indeed be accomplished: