While he was turning this over in his mind and in his heart,
out of her fragrant high-roofed chamber came Helen,
looking like Artemis of the golden distaff;

and with her Adreste set out her well-made reclining chair,
Alcippe brought a rug of soft wool,
and Phylo brought her silver basket, given her
by Alcandre, wife of Polybus, who lived in Thebes
of Egypt, where the greatest wealth lies stored in houses:

he gave Menelaus two silver baths
and a pair of tripods and ten talents of gold;

and apart from these his wife gave Helen beautiful gifts of her own —
a golden distaff she gave, and a basket on wheels,
silver, its rims finished off in gold.

This the handmaid Phylo brought and set beside her,
stuffed with fine-spun yarn, and across it
lay the distaff, wound with wool of violet darkness.

She sat down on the chair, with a footstool for her feet,
and at once began asking her husband about everything:

"Do we know yet, Menelaus, nurtured of Zeus, who these men
declare themselves to be, who have come to our house?

Shall I lie, or speak the truth?

My heart bids me speak.

For never yet, I say, have I seen such a likeness,
in man or woman — awe takes me, looking at him —
as this boy is like the son of great-hearted Odysseus:

Telemachus, whom that man left new-born in the house
when for my sake — bitch-faced that I was — you Achaeans
came up under Troy, with bold war in your hearts."
Then fair-haired Menelaus answered her:

"I too see it now, wife, just as you liken him:

those were the very feet of the man, the very hands,
the glance of his eyes, the head, the hair above.

And just now, remembering Odysseus,
I was telling of all he labored and endured
for my sake — and the boy shed a bitter tear from under his brows,
holding the purple cloak up before his eyes."
Then Peisistratus, Nestor's son, answered him:

"Menelaus, son of Atreus, Zeus-nurtured, leader of peoples,
this is indeed that man's son, as you say.

But he is modest, and his heart is shy
of splashing forth big words on a first arrival
in front of you, whose voice delights us both like a god's.

Gerenian Nestor the horseman sent me out
to come with him as escort:

he longed to see you,
in hope you might set some word or work before him.

For a son has many sorrows in the house
when his father is gone and no other helpers stand by him —
as now with Telemachus:

the father gone, and no others
in all the land to beat trouble away."
Then fair-haired Menelaus answered him:

"Well now!

Truly the son of a beloved man is in my house,
a man who fought through many trials for my sake;

and I used to say that when he came I would welcome him beyond all
the other Argives — if Olympian Zeus of the wide voice
gave the two of us a homecoming over the sea in our fast ships.

I would have settled him a city in Argos, and built him a house,
and brought him out of Ithaca with his goods and his son
and all his people — emptying out one town
of those that lie around and own me as their lord.

Being here, we would have mingled often;

and nothing
would have parted us then, loving and delighting in each other,
until death's black cloud came folding round us.

But such things, I suppose, the god himself must have grudged,
who made that unlucky man — him alone — the man who never came home."
So he spoke, and stirred in them all the ache of lament.

Argive Helen wept, the daughter of Zeus,
and Telemachus wept, and Menelaus, Atreus' son,
nor could the son of Nestor keep his eyes dry:

for his heart remembered blameless Antilochus,
whom the shining son of bright Dawn had killed.

Remembering him, he spoke winged words:

"Son of Atreus, old Nestor always said
you were clear-headed beyond other mortals, whenever we remembered you
in his halls, and questioned one another.