I am not held here by any will of mine.

I must have sinned
against the deathless ones who hold wide heaven.

But tell me — for the gods know all things —
which of the immortals shackles me here and has bound my road,
and my homecoming — how I shall go over the fish-filled sea.'
So I spoke, and the shining goddess answered at once:

'Then I will tell you, stranger, and tell you truly.

There haunts this place an unerring Old Man of the Sea,
deathless Proteus of Egypt, who knows the depths
of every sea — Poseidon's under-servant.

He, they say, is my father, who begot me.

If you could somehow set an ambush and take hold of him,
he would tell you the road, and the measures of your journey,
and your homecoming — how you shall go over the fish-filled sea.

And he would tell you too, Zeus-nurtured, if you wish,
whatever evil and good have been done in your halls
while you have been gone on your long and grinding road.'
So she spoke, and I answered her:

'Devise the ambush yourself, for this old god —
or he will see me first, or know beforehand, and escape me.

A god is hard for a mortal man to master.'
So I spoke, and the shining goddess answered at once:

'Then I will tell you, stranger, and tell you truly.

When the sun bestrides the middle of heaven,
then the unerring Old Man of the Sea comes out of the water
under the West Wind's breath, hidden in the dark shiver of the sea,
and coming out he beds down under the hollow caves;

and around him seals, the brood of the sea's lovely daughter,
sleep in a crowd, come up out of the gray salt water,
breathing out the sharp smell of the deep brine.

There I will bring you at the showing of dawn
and bed you down in the row.

Choose well three companions,
the best you have by the well-benched ships.

And I will tell you all the old man's tricks.

First he will count his seals, and go over them;

and when he has told them off by fives and seen them all,
he will lie down in their midst, like a herdsman in his flocks.

The moment you see him settled down,
then let strength and force be all your thought:

hold him there for all his struggling, however he strains to escape.

He will make trial of everything, turning into all things
that creep upon the earth — into water, into god-kindled fire;

but hold him unshakably, and press him the harder.

And when at last he questions you with words himself,
in the same shape you saw him settle to sleep,
then leave off your force, hero:

set the old man loose,
and ask him which of the gods bears hard on you,
and your homecoming — how you shall go over the fish-filled sea.'
So speaking she plunged under the surging sea.

And I went to the ships where they stood in the sand,
and my heart ran dark with many things as I went.

And when I had come down to the ship and the sea,
we made our supper, and ambrosial night came on,
and we lay down to sleep on the surf-line of the sea.

When Dawn appeared, the early-born, with fingers of rose,
I set out along the shore of the wide-wayed sea,
praying hard to the gods;

and I took three companions,
the three I trusted most for every venture.

She meanwhile had slipped under the wide gulf of the sea
and brought up out of the deep four sealskins,
all fresh-flayed:

she was plotting an ambush against her own father.

She had scooped out beds in the sea-sand
and sat there waiting.

And we came up close beside her,
and she bedded us down in the row, and threw a skin over each.

There our ambush would have been most horrible:

the deadly
stench of the salt-bred seals ground us down horribly —
who would lay himself down beside a beast of the sea?

—
but she herself saved us;

she devised a great relief:

she brought ambrosia and set it under each man's nose,
breathing sweetness, and it killed the stench of the beast.