Then the goddess thought of one thing more, gray-eyed Athena.
She made a phantom, fashioned in the likeness of a woman —
Iphthime, daughter of great-hearted Icarius,
wed to Eumelus, whose home was in Pherae —
and sent it to the house of godlike Odysseus,
so that it might bring Penelope, weeping and mourning,
some pause from lamentation and tear-filled grief.
Into the chamber it came, past the strap of the bolt,
and stood above her head, and said to her:
"Do you sleep, Penelope, your heart worn with grief?
No — the gods who live at ease will not have you
weep and be anguished: for your son has his homecoming
still; he is no sinner in the sight of the gods."
Then watchful-minded Penelope answered her —
slumbering very sweetly at the gates of dream:
"Why have you come here, sister? You have not been
used to come before: your home is far away.
And you bid me leave off my misery and all the pains
that crowd my mind and heart.
Long ago I lost my noble husband, the lion-hearted,
graced among the Danaans with every excellence,
that noble man, whose fame goes wide through Hellas and the heart of Argos.
And now again my beloved son has gone in a hollow ship,
a mere boy, unpracticed in hardships and the meetings of men.
It is for him I mourn even more than for that other;
for him I tremble, for him I fear, that something may strike him,
whether among the men of the land he has gone to, or on the sea.
For many enemies are scheming against him,
hungry to kill him before he comes back to his own country."
And the dim phantom answered her:
"Take heart. Do not fear too greatly in your mind.
Such an escort goes with him as other men
have prayed to have stand beside them — for she has power —
Pallas Athena. And she pities you your grieving:
it is she who sent me now to tell you this."
Then watchful-minded Penelope said to her:
"If you are truly a god, and have heard the voice of a god,
then come — tell me also of that other, that man of sorrow:
does he live still somewhere, and see the light of the sun,
or is he dead already, down in the house of Hades?"
And the dim phantom answered her:
"Of him I will not tell the story through —
whether he lives or is dead. It is evil to speak words empty as wind."
So speaking it slipped away by the doorpost bolt
into the breath of the winds. And the daughter of Icarius
started up out of sleep, and her heart was warmed:
so vivid a dream had rushed upon her in the dark hour of the night.

But the suitors had embarked, and were sailing the watery ways,
turning over in their hearts sheer murder for Telemachus.
There is a rocky island in the middle of the sea,
midway between Ithaca and rugged Samos —
Asteris, no great place; but there are harbors in it
fit for ships to lurk in, open at either end. There the Achaeans waited in ambush.

---