"Dear bride — kill me with the pitiless bronze
or leave me in the house, but I will not hide the story from you.

I knew all of it.

I gave him what he ordered,
bread and sweet wine.

And he took a great oath from me
not to tell you before the twelfth day came,
or you missed him yourself and heard that he was gone —
so you would not mar your lovely skin with weeping.

Now bathe, and take clean clothing for your body,
and go up to your upper room with your attendant women,
and pray to Athena, daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus:

she may yet save him, even out of death itself.

And do not grieve a grieving old man more.

I cannot think
the blessed gods have wholly hated the line
of Arceisius' son:

someone will yet be left to hold
the high-roofed house and the fat fields far around."
So she spoke, and lulled her lament, and stayed her eyes from weeping.

And she bathed, and took clean clothing for her body,
and went up to her upper room with her attendant women,
and set the barley-grains in a basket, and prayed to Athena:

"Hear me, child of aegis-bearing Zeus, Unwearied One.

If ever Odysseus of the many designs, in these halls,
burned fat thigh-cuts of ox or sheep for you,
remember them for me now:

save my dear son,
and beat away the suitors in their evil overbearing pride."
So she cried the ritual cry;

and the goddess heard her prayer.

But the suitors broke into uproar through the shadowy halls,
and thus would one of the arrogant young men say:

"So the much-courted queen is making ready a marriage
for one of us — and knows nothing of the death prepared for her son."
So they would say — knowing nothing of what was prepared.

And Antinous addressed them all, and said:

"Fools!

Keep clear of overweening talk of any kind —
or someone may carry the word inside.

Up now, in silence, and let us accomplish
the plan that pleased us all in our hearts."
So he spoke, and picked the twenty best men,
and they went down to the fast ship and the sand-beach of the sea.

First of all they hauled the ship down to deep water,
and set the mast and the sails in the black ship,
and fitted the oars into their leather slings,
all in due order, and spread the white sails open;

and high-spirited henchmen carried down their arms.

They moored her well out in the water, and came ashore,
and there they took their supper, and waited for evening to come.

But she in her upper room, watchful-minded Penelope,
lay fasting, tasting neither food nor drink,
turning it over: whether her blameless son would escape death,
or be broken under the overweening suitors.
As a lion turns and turns amid a crowd of men,
in dread, as they draw the treacherous circle round him,
so she was turning when the deep sleep came upon her;
and she sank back and slept, and all her joints went loose.