When Dawn appeared, the early-born, with fingers of rose,
Menelaus of the great war-cry rose up from his bed,
put on his clothes, slung his sharp sword about his shoulder,
bound the beautiful sandals beneath his shining feet,
and came out of his bedroom looking like a god.

He sat down beside Telemachus, and spoke a word, and named him:

"What need has brought you here, hero Telemachus,
to shining Lacedaemon, over the broad back of the sea?

A public matter or private?

Tell me the plain truth of it."
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him:

"Menelaus, son of Atreus, Zeus-nurtured, leader of peoples,
I came in hope you might tell me some word of my father.

My house is being eaten;

my rich fields are ruined;

the house is packed with enemies, who day upon day
slaughter my thronging flocks and my shambling crook-horned cattle —
my mother's suitors, with their overweening insolence.

That is why I come now to your knees:

in hope you will consent
to tell his bitter death — whether you saw it
with your own eyes, or heard the tale of him from another
wanderer.

Beyond all men his mother bore him for sorrow.

Do not soften anything from courtesy or pity:

tell me fully whatever sight you came upon.

I beg you — if ever my father, good Odysseus,
promised you word or work and made it good
in the Trojans' country, where you Achaeans suffered your pains,
remember it for me now:

tell me the unerring truth."
Then fair-haired Menelaus, greatly stirred, replied:

"Shame on them!

Truly in the bed of a strong-hearted man
they want to lie — the spineless creatures that they are!

As when a deer beds down her newborn suckling fawns
in the thicket-lair of a mighty lion,
and goes questing the spurs and grassy hollows,
grazing — and then the lion comes back to his own bed
and lets an ugly doom loose on them both:

so Odysseus will let an ugly doom loose on those men.

If only — father Zeus, Athena, Apollo!

—
the man he was long ago in strong-founded Lesbos,
when he rose on a challenge and wrestled Philomeleides
and threw him hard, and all the Achaeans cheered:

such as he was then, let that Odysseus close with the suitors:

quick would their fates be then, and bitter their weddings.

As for what you ask of me and beg me:

I will not
talk around it, swerving aside, and I will not deceive you.

What the unerring Old Man of the Sea told me,
not one word of it will I hide or cover from you.

In Egypt the gods still held me, hungry as I was for home,
because I had not offered them their full hecatombs —
and the gods will always have their commandments remembered.

Now there is an island in the much-surging sea
off the mouth of Egypt — Pharos, men call it,
as far out as a hollow ship runs in a whole day
with a whistling wind astern of her —
and in it a harbor, good anchorage, from which men launch
their trim ships to sea, once they have drawn black water.

There the gods held me twenty days:

never once the sea-winds
blowing fair, that speed ships
over the broad back of the sea.

And now all our stores would have been spent, and the men's strength,
had not one of the gods pitied me and saved me:

the daughter of mighty Proteus, the Old Man of the Sea —
Eidothea.

For I stirred her heart beyond the rest
when she met me wandering alone, apart from my companions —
for they were forever roving round the island, fishing
with bent hooks, their bellies pinched with hunger.

She stood close by me and spoke, and said:

'Are you a fool, stranger — so slack, so loose of wit?

Or do you slacken by choice, and enjoy your suffering?

So long you are held on the island, and can find
no ending of it, while your companions' hearts grow small.'
So she spoke, and I answered her:

'I will say this straight, whichever of the goddesses you are: