Nor was Penelope long in ignorance
of the schemes the suitors were brewing deep in their hearts:

for the herald Medon told her, who had overheard their plans,
standing outside the court while they wove their plot within.

He went through the house to bring the news to Penelope,
and as he crossed the threshold Penelope said to him:

"Herald, why have the lordly suitors sent you in?

To tell the slave-women of godlike Odysseus
to leave their work and make the feast ready for them?

May they never woo again, never gather anywhere else —
may this be the last supper they ever eat here,
they who swarm in day after day and shear away the living,
the substance of clear-headed Telemachus!

Did you never hear,
in years gone by, when you were children, from your fathers,
what kind of man Odysseus was among your parents' generation?

Never a deed out of measure, never an unjust word
in all the land — though that is the way of godlike kings:

one mortal a king will hate, another he may love;

but that man never did outrage to a single soul.

No — your hearts are on show, and your ugly works:

there is no gratitude left, afterward, for good deeds done."
Then Medon answered her, a man of clear-headed sense:

"Would to god, my queen, that this were the worst of it.

A greater evil by far, and harder to bear,
the suitors are plotting now — may the son of Cronos never accomplish it:

they are bent on cutting Telemachus down with the sharp bronze
on his way home.

He went for news of his father
to holy Pylos and to shining Lacedaemon."
So he spoke, and there where she stood her knees went loose, and her heart;

for a long time speechlessness held her words;

her eyes
filled up with tears;

the flower of her voice was stopped.

At long last she found words to answer him:

"Herald, why is my child gone?

There was no need
to board the fast-running ships, that are men's horses
of the salt water, and cross the great wet waste.

Is it so that not even his name should be left among men?"
Then Medon answered her, a man of clear-headed sense:

"I do not know whether some god stirred him, or whether his own
heart drove him to go to Pylos, to learn
either his father's homecoming, or what doom he met."
So he spoke, and went away down through the house of Odysseus.

And heart-eating anguish poured around her;

she could no longer
bear to sit on a chair, though the house was full of them,
but sank down on the threshold of her richly-worked chamber,
moaning pitiably;

and around her whimpered the slave-women,
all of them, young and old, that the house held.

And sobbing hard, Penelope said among them:

"Hear me, dear women.

The Olympian has given me sorrows
beyond all the women who were bred and born beside me.

Long ago I lost my noble husband, the lion-hearted,
graced among the Danaans with every excellence,
that noble man, whose fame goes wide through Hellas and the heart of Argos.

And now again the storm-winds have snatched my beloved son,
without glory, out of these halls, and I never heard him go.

Hard-hearted!

Not even you — not one of you — thought
to wake me from my bed, though your hearts knew well
the hour he went down to the black hollow ship.

If I had learned that he was pondering this journey,
then either he would have stayed, for all his hunger for the road,
or he would have left me dead in these halls behind him.

But now let someone run and call old Dolius,
my slave, whom my father gave me when I first came here,
who keeps my orchard of many trees — so that quickly
he may go sit beside Laertes and tell him all of it.

Perhaps Laertes may weave some plan in his heart,
and come out and weep before the people, who are bent
on destroying his line and the line of godlike Odysseus."
Then the dear nurse Eurycleia said to her: