But when from there too a safe homecoming showed,
and the gods turned the wind fair, and they reached home —
oh, rejoicing he set foot on his fathers' land,
and touched his country and kissed it:

the hot tears
streamed from him, so glad he was to see his land.

But from a lookout a watchman saw him — posted there
by Aegisthus of the crooked counsels, who had promised him
two talents of gold for wages:

a full year he had watched,
so the king might not slip past unseen and remember his fighting strength.

The man went with his news to the house, to the shepherd of the people,
and at once Aegisthus laid his treacherous craft:

he picked the twenty best men in the land
and set an ambush, and across the hall he ordered a feast made ready;

and then he went to summon Agamemnon, shepherd of the people,
with horses and chariots — and unspeakable things in his mind.

He led him up unwitting of his death, and killed him
at the dinner — as a man cuts down an ox at the manger.

Not one of the companions of Atreus' son was left, who followed him,
and not one of Aegisthus' men:

they were killed in the halls.'
So he spoke, and my heart broke within me,
and I wept, sitting there in the sand;

my heart
had no more will to live and see the light of the sun.

But when I had had my fill of weeping and writhing,
then the unerring Old Man of the Sea said to me:

'No more now, son of Atreus, this long unbending
weeping:

we shall find no cure in it.

Quick as you can,
try how you may come back to your own fatherland.

Either you will find him alive — or Orestes
has already killed him first, and you may come in time for the burying.'
So he spoke;

and the heart and the proud spirit in my breast,
for all my grieving, were warmed again,
and lifting my voice I spoke winged words to him:

'These men I now know of.

But name the third man:

the one still living, held back on the wide sea —
or dead.

Grieved as I am, I want to hear it.'
So I spoke, and he answered me at once:

'The son of Laertes, whose home is in Ithaca.

I saw him on an island, letting the big tears fall,
in the halls of the nymph Calypso, who holds him there
by force;

and he cannot come to his own fatherland,
for he has no ships at hand, no oars, no companions
to carry him over the broad back of the sea.

But for you, Zeus-nurtured Menelaus, it is not fated
to die in horse-grazing Argos and meet your doom:

the deathless ones will carry you to the Elysian plain
and the ends of the earth — where fair-haired Rhadamanthus is,
where life is easiest of all for men:

no snow, no heavy winter, never rain,
but always Ocean sends up the breath of the singing West Wind
to bring men coolness —
because Helen is yours, and you are son-in-law to Zeus.'
So speaking he plunged under the surging sea.

And I went to the ships with my godlike companions,
and my heart ran dark with many things as I went.

And when we had come down to the ship and the sea,
we made our supper, and ambrosial night came on,
and we lay down to sleep on the surf-line of the sea.

When Dawn appeared, the early-born, with fingers of rose,
first of all we hauled our ships down to the bright salt water
and set the masts and the sails in the trim ships,
and the men came aboard and took their places at the oarlocks,
and sitting in order they struck the gray salt water with their oars.

Back to Egypt I brought the ships, to the river
fallen from Zeus, and I offered the full hecatombs;

and when I had put to rest the anger of the gods who are forever,
I heaped a mound for Agamemnon, that his fame might never be quenched.

That done, I sailed for home, and the immortals gave me
a wind, and brought me quickly to my own dear country.

But come now — stay on in my halls
until the eleventh day, or the twelfth;