And the two of them halted at the gateway of the house, themselves
and their horses — the hero Telemachus and Nestor's shining son.

Lord Eteoneus came out and saw them,
the busy henchman of glorious Menelaus,
and went through the house to bring the news to the shepherd of the people;

standing close he spoke winged words to him:

"Two strangers here, Menelaus, nurtured of Zeus —
two men, and they look like the stock of great Zeus.

Tell me:

do we unyoke their swift horses for them,
or send them on to another man, who may welcome them?"
Then fair-haired Menelaus, greatly stirred, replied:

"You were no fool before, Eteoneus, son of Boethous —
but now you are babbling nonsense like a child.

The two of us ate plenty of strangers' bread,
you and I, on the road home, hoping Zeus might someday
give us rest from misery.

Unyoke the strangers' horses,
and bring the men themselves in, to share the feast."
So he spoke, and the man dashed back through the hall, and called the other
busy henchmen to come along with him.

They loosed the sweating horses from under the yoke
and tied them up at the mangers of the horses,
and threw them spelt, and mixed white barley in with it,
and leaned the chariot against the gleaming entrance-wall,
and led the men into the godlike house.

And they stared
in wonder through the house of the Zeus-nurtured king:

for there was a sheen as of the sun or the moon
through the high-roofed house of glorious Menelaus.

And when they had had their joy of gazing,
they stepped into the polished baths and bathed.

And when the slave-women had bathed them and rubbed them with oil,
and thrown about them fleecy cloaks and tunics,
they sat down on high seats beside Menelaus, Atreus' son.

A handmaid brought water for their hands in a pitcher,
a beautiful golden one, and poured it over a silver basin
for them to wash, and drew up a polished table beside them.

The grave housekeeper brought bread and set it before them,
laying out delicacies in plenty, giving gladly of her store;

a carver lifted platters of meat of every kind
and set them down, and placed gold cups beside them.

And fair-haired Menelaus greeted them with a wave of the hand:

"Take of the bread, and be welcome.

And afterward,
when you have tasted supper, we will ask what men
you are:

for the stock of your parents is not lost in you —
you are of the stock of scepter-bearing kings,
nurtured of Zeus.

No base men could father such sons."
So he spoke, and set before them the fat roast chine of an ox,
lifting it in his hands — the portion of honor they had set for him.

And their hands went out to the good things spread before them.

But when they had put away desire for food and drink,
then Telemachus spoke to the son of Nestor,
leaning his head close, so that the others might not hear:

"Look, son of Nestor, delight of my heart —
the lightning of bronze through these echoing halls,
the gold and the amber, the silver and the ivory!

Such, I think, is the court of Olympian Zeus within:

all this here, past speaking!

Awe takes me, looking at it."
But fair-haired Menelaus caught what he was saying,
and lifting his voice he spoke winged words to them:

"Dear children, with Zeus no mortal man could vie:

his halls and his possessions are deathless things.

Among men, another may match me in wealth — or may not.

Much I suffered for it, and far I wandered
to bring it home in my ships:

eight years gone before I came,
driven wandering to Cyprus and Phoenicia and the Egyptians;

I reached the Ethiopians, the Sidonians, the Erembi,
and Libya, where the lambs come horned from the birth,
for the ewes bear three times in the full round of the year.

There no lord and no shepherd goes wanting
for cheese and meat and sweet milk: