Now he, so long as the shafts for defense were still there beside him,
kept on striking one suitor after another within his own house,
aiming unerringly;

and they fell one by one at close quarters.

But when the arrows deserted the lord as he shot from the bowstring,
then he leaned the bow by a pillar of the well-builded hall there,
setting it upright against the bright-faced wall by the entry,
and around his shoulders he slung a shield made of four hides,
and upon his mighty head he set a well-fashioned helmet,
horse-haired, and the crest above it nodded terribly over him;

then he grasped in his hands two stout spears tipped over with bronze.

There was a side-door set in the wall of the well-builded chamber,
and a way by the top of the threshold out of the strong hall
led to a passage;

and well-fitted planks were fastened upon it.

Noble Odysseus commanded the godlike swineherd to guard it,
standing close by the place;

for that was the one sole outlet.

Then Agelaus spoke among them, declaring his thought to them all there:

“Friends, could not one of you climb through the side-door upward
and give word to the people, so the cry might arise all the quicker?

Then at once this man would shoot now for the last time with the bowstring.”
Then Melanthius the goatherd addressed him again and answered:

“No, Agelaus, cherished by Zeus, there is no way to do this;

for too terribly near are the fair doors leading into the courtyard,
and the mouth of the passage is hard;

one man might hold back all of us,
if he were strong.

But come now, I will bring you armor to harness on
out of the chamber;

for there, I am thinking, and nowhere else have
arms been stored by Odysseus and by his illustrious son here.”
So saying, Melanthius the goatherd climbed up through the hall there,
making his way by the smoke-vents into Odysseus' storerooms.

From there he took out twelve shields, and as many spears with them,
and as many bronze helmets thick-crested with horsehair upon them;

then he went on his way, and swiftly brought them and gave them to suitors.

Then indeed the knees of Odysseus were loosened beneath him,
and his dear heart, when he saw them all putting the armor about them
and shaking in hand their long spears;

and mighty the task seemed before him.

Quickly then he addressed Telemachus, speaking winged words to him:

“Telemachus, surely one of the women here in these chambers
stirs up this evil war against us, or else it is Melanthius.”
Then prudent Telemachus answered him back in reply and said this:

“Father, I myself am the one who blundered in this, and no other
bears the blame, for I left the close-fitted door of the chamber
standing ajar;

and their watcher was sharper of eye than I was.

But go now, noble Eumaeus, and fasten the door of the chamber,
and find out whether it is one of the women who does these things,
or Melanthius, son of Dolius;

for that is the man whom I suspect.”
So they were speaking such words to each other there in the great hall.

Back to the storeroom Melanthius went, the goatherd of the homestead,
meaning to fetch fine armor;

but the noble swineherd observed him,
and at once he spoke to Odysseus, standing there very near him:

“Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus of many devices,
there goes again that secretive man whom we both had suspected;

into the storeroom he goes;

so now tell me truly and clearly,
shall I kill him, if indeed I prove to be stronger than he is,
or shall I bring him here to you, so he may repay all transgressions,
many and vile, that this man has plotted within your own household?”
Then resourceful Odysseus in answer addressed him and told him: