Then Telemachus and the cowherd and also the swineherd
scraped with scrapers the floor of the close-built house of the master;

and the serving-women carried the filth away and put it outside.

But when they had set all the great hall fully in order,
then from the strong-built hall they led out the serving-women,
to the place between the round room and the excellent fence of the courtyard,
and penned them within a strait place where there was no escaping.

Then prudent Telemachus began and spoke out among them:

“No, not by any clean death will I take away the life breath
of these women who poured disgrace upon my head
and on my mother’s, and slept by the side of the suitors.”
So he spoke, and fastening a cable of a dark-prowed vessel
to a great pillar, he looped it around the round chamber,
stretching it taut up high, so none with the feet could touch earth there.

As when long-winged thrushes or doves
dash into a snare that stands in a thicket,
seeking a resting place, and a hateful bed has received them,
so in a row the women held up their heads, and around them all
nooses were fixed on their necks, so that they might die most piteously.

They fluttered with their feet a little while, but not very long there.

Then they led Melanthius out through the porch and across the courtyard;

and from him with pitiless bronze they cut away nose and both ears,
and they pulled out his genitals, to give raw for the dogs to devour,
and in the fury of heart they chopped off his hands and his feet there.

Then after they had washed off both hands and feet of the slaughter,
into the house to Odysseus they went;

and the work was accomplished.

Then he spoke to the dear nurse Eurycleia:

“
“Bring sulfur, old mother, a cure against evils, and bring me the fire,
so I may sulfur the hall;

and bid Penelope also
to come here down to me with her attendant women;

urge all the serving-women as well through the house to come hither.”
Then in reply to him spoke the dear nurse, Eurycleia:

“Yes indeed, my child, what you have said is fitting and proper.

Come then, let me bring you a mantle and tunic for clothing;

do not so, with your broad shoulders wrapped all over in tatters,
stand in the halls of your house;

it would be shameful and blameworthy.”
Then resourceful Odysseus answered and spoke to her:

“First of all let there now be fire for me in the hall.”
So he spoke, and the dear nurse Eurycleia did not disobey him,
but she brought him the fire and the sulfur;

and then Odysseus
thoroughly fumed the hall and the house and the courtyard around it.

Then the old woman went through the beautiful house of Odysseus,
carrying word to the women and urgently calling them onward.

Out of the hall then they came with torches held in their hands there.

Round him they gathered in throngs and embraced Odysseus closely,
kissing his head and his shoulders in love, and clasping his hands fast.

Then a sweet longing came over his heart for weeping and wailing,
for in his heart and his mind he knew every one of the women.