There Odysseus the sacker of cities struck down Eurydamas,
Amphimedon fell to Telemachus, Polybus to the swineherd;

and then the neat-herd, the master and watcher of cattle, struck Ctesippus
full in the chest, and boasting over him spoke out and addressed him:

“Son of Polytherses, lover of mockery, never hereafter
yield to your witless folly and speak some over-proud saying;

leave speech to the gods, since surely they are much stronger than mortals.

Here is a guest-gift back in return for the hoof that you gave once
to godlike Odysseus, while he went like a beggar through his hall.”
So spoke the herdsman in charge of the oxen with curving horns there;

but Odysseus stabbed Damastor's son from nearby with the long spear.

And Telemachus stabbed Leocritus, Evenor's son there,
with his spear in the midriff, and drove the bronze clean through him;

and he pitched on his face and smote the earth with his forehead.

Then Athena lifted on high the man-destroying aegis,
up from the roof overhead, and the minds in them reeled into panic.

Then through the hall they stampeded, like cattle that run in a herd when
the darting gadfly has rushed in among them and set them all shuddering
in the spring season, when all the days are lengthening onward.

And as vultures with hooked claws and beaks curved inward and deadly,
coming down from the mountains, swoop upon flocks of small birds there,
and they skim over the plain, cringing low under the cloud-bank,
but the vultures leap on them and kill them, and no defense comes,
neither escape;

and men take joy in watching the hunting;

so these men, rushing around through the house at the suitors before them,
struck them to this side and that;

and terrible groaning arose there
from skulls being battered, and all the floor steamed up with bloodshed.

Then Leodes rushed up and clasped Odysseus fast by the knees there,
and beseeching him earnestly spoke these winged words in entreaty:

“By your knees, Odysseus, I implore you;

respect me and spare me.

For I declare I never spoke to any of the women
in your halls, nor did I perform any insolent action;

rather I sought to restrain the suitors, if any man acted
in such a way;

but they would not obey me and keep off their evil.

Therefore by their own reckless deeds they have earned a shameful destruction.

But I, their seer at the rites, though guilty of nothing among them,
shall lie with the rest;

for there is no gratitude after good service.”
Then with a darkening glance wise Odysseus answered and told him:

“If indeed among these men you boast that you are their diviner,
many a time, I suppose, in these halls you have prayed in your spirit
that far from me the fulfilment of sweet homecoming might be,
and that my cherished wife might follow you and bear you children.

Therefore you will not escape from a death most bitter for mourning.”
So then having spoken, he seized with his massive hand a sword there
lying, the one that Agelaus had flung to the ground before him
as he was killed;

and he drove it straight through the midst of his neck there.

While he was still speaking, his head was mingled up with the dust then.

Yet still the singer escaped from the black fate hovering near him,
Phemius, Terpes’ son, who had sung among those suitors by compulsion.

He stood there holding within both his hands the clear-toned lyre there
close beside the side-door;

and within him his heart was divided,
whether, slipping out of the hall, to go to the great altar of Zeus there,
Zeus of the Court, and sit by the altar well fashioned in stonework,
where Laertes and great Odysseus had often burned there
thighbones of oxen, or else rush forward and clasp at Odysseus’ knees there.

As he turned it about in his mind, this seemed the better decision: