to take hold of the knees of Odysseus, son of Laertes.

Then indeed he set down the hollow lyre on the ground there
midway between the mixing-bowl and the chair with silver studs on it,
and he himself rushed up to Odysseus and clasped at his knees then,
and in entreaty to him he addressed him with winged words, saying:

“By your knees I implore you, Odysseus;

respect me and pity.

Grief for this deed will come upon you hereafter, if you kill me,
me, a singer who sings for gods immortal and mortal men also.

I am self-taught, and a god has breathed into my inward spirit
every kind of path for song;

and I seem fit to sing in your presence
even as if before a god.

Therefore do not desire to cut my throat off.

Telemachus too, your own beloved son, would surely attest this,
that not by my own wish and not from any craving whatever
did I come to your house and sing for the suitors at banquet,
but they were far more numerous, stronger than I, and compelled me.”
So he spoke, and the sacred strength of Telemachus heard him,
and at once he addressed his father, who stood there close beside him:

“Stop, and do not in any way stab this guiltless man with the bronze now.

Let us save Medon the herald as well, who always in our house
cared for me when I was a child in my father’s dwelling,
if indeed Philoetius has not killed him already, or else
the swineherd, or he met your assault as you surged through the hall here.”
So he spoke, and Medon heard him, a man of understanding,
for he lay huddled beneath a chair, and around him an oxhide,
newly flayed, had been wrapped, while he fled from the black doom near him.

Quickly he rose from beneath the chair, and swiftly cast off the oxhide,
then he rushed up to Telemachus and clasped hard at his knees there,
and in entreaty to him he addressed him with winged words, saying:

“Dear friend, here I am, yes, myself;

hold back, and tell your father
not to destroy me in his overpowering might with the sharp bronze,
angered against the suitor-men, who kept consuming his substance
here in the halls, and in their folly they gave no thought at all to you.”
Then with a smile wise Odysseus of many devices addressed him:

“Take heart, since this man has held you back and preserved you from ruin,
so that you may know in your heart, and hereafter may tell it to others,
how much better good action is always than wickedness evil.

But now, going outside of the hall, sit down in the courtyard,
out of the bloodshed, both you and the singer renowned among many,
while I within the house accomplish the work that is needful.”
So he spoke, and the two went out from the hall and departed,
and indeed both sat down by the altar of Zeus the Almighty,
glancing around every way, for their hearts still expected destruction.

Then Odysseus looked round through his house, lest any man still there
living might yet have escaped him in hiding from black destruction.

But he saw them all lying in blood and in dust there before him,
many of them, like fishes that fishermen have from the gray sea
dragged in the meshes of nets to the hollow curve of the seashore,
out from the surf of the salt sea;

and all of them lie on the sand there
yearning back for the sea-waves, as there on the beaches they sprawl there,
and the shining Sun takes away the life-breath out of them wholly.

So at that time the suitors lay heaped one upon one another.

Then Odysseus of many devices addressed Telemachus, saying:

“Telemachus, come now, call me the nurse Eurycleia,
so that I may speak out the word that within my heart is intended.”
So he spoke, and Telemachus obeyed his beloved father,
and shaking the door he called to the nurse Eurycleia: