Till then, no man could censure your anger and say it was blameful.”
Then with a lowering gaze spoke out resourceful Odysseus:

“Eurymachus, not if you gave me all your ancestral possessions,
all that is yours at present, and added more from elsewhere,
not even so would I hold back these hands of mine from the slaughter
till the suitors have paid for the whole of their arrogant outrage.

Now there lies before you the choice, either stand up and fight me,
or flee, if any man thinks to escape his death and destruction.

Yet I do not suppose one man of you will escape steep destruction.”
So he spoke, and the knees of the others were loosed, and their heartstrings.

Then Eurymachus spoke out among them a second time, calling:

“Friends, this man will not hold back those invincible hands now,
since he has taken the polished bow and the quiver beside him.

From the smooth threshold there he will keep on shooting until he
kills us all.

So let us remember the work of battle.

Draw out your swords, and hold up the tables against the arrows,
arrows of sudden death, and let us all rush upon him
packed together, if so we may push him away from the threshold,
drive him out from the doors, and go through the town, and the alarm cry
will rise at once.

Then that man would have shot his last arrow.”
So he spoke, and he drew his sharp sword out of the sheath there,
bronze and keen on both edges, and sprang straight forward against him
with a blood-freezing yell;

but noble Odysseus did not miss him,
loosed the shaft and struck him there in the chest by the nipple,
and planted the swift-flying arrow deep fast in his liver;

from his hand the broadsword fell to the floor, and over the table
down he collapsed in a heap, and spilled to the earth all the viands
and the two-handled cup;

and he battered the ground with his forehead,
writhing in anguish of heart, and with both of his feet he kept kicking,
shaking the chair;

and darkness was poured all over his eyesight.

Then Amphinomus rushed at renowned Odysseus in fury,
charging headlong against him, and drew his keen-edged sword there,
hoping somehow to force him away from the doors;

but before him
Telemachus struck from behind with a bronze-shod spear in his onset,
square in the midst of the shoulders, and drove it on through his chest-bone;

thundering he fell, and he smote on the ground with his full brow.

Then Telemachus sprang back, leaving the long-shadowing lance there
fixed in Amphinomus;

for he feared lest one of the Achaeans,
while he was tugging out the long-shadowing spear, might attack him
rushing with sword, or might strike him down as he bent forward.

Then he ran, and very swiftly came to the side of his father,
and standing close beside him spoke out winged words in address there:

“Father, now I will bring you a shield and a pair of spears here,
and a helmet of solid bronze, fitted close over the temples;

I myself too will put armor on as I go, and I will give some
also to swineherd and cowherd;

for to be armed is far better.”
Then resourceful Odysseus in answer addressed him and said this:

“Bring them at a run, while arrows are still here for my defense yet,
lest they should drive me away from the doors, when I stand here alone.”
So he spoke, and Telemachus obeyed his beloved father,
and went on his way to the chamber where glorious armor was lying.

From there he took four shields, and eight spears together,
and four bronze helmets thick-crested with horsehair upon them;

then he came back bearing them, and quickly reached his dear father.

First of all he clad his own body about with the bronze there;

and in the same way the two serving men put on the fair armor,
and stood on both sides of Odysseus, master of battle and counsel.