“Odysseus, no longer in you does steadfast fury remain now,
nor any valor like that when, for Helen the white-armed and noble,
nine long years without cease you fought with the Trojans in battle,
and in the grim encounter of war you slew many fighters;

and by your counsel the broad-wayed city of Priam was taken.

How is it now, when you have come home to your house and possessions,
that face to face with the suitors you wail to be thought a brave fighter?

Come now here, my dear friend, stand by me and look on this action,
so that you may know what sort of a man, among hostile opponents,
Mentor the son of Alcimus is in repaying a kindness.”
So she spoke, but as yet she did not bestow full victory on either,
but went on testing the strength and the fighting spirit and endurance
both of Odysseus himself and the glorious son at his side there.

Then she herself to the smoke-dark roof of the hall darted upward,
and there she perched overhead, in the likeness and look of a swallow.

Then Agelaus, the son of Damastor, roused up the suitors,
Eurynomus with him, Amphimedon, and Demoptolemus,
Peisander son of Polyctor, and battle-wise Polybus also;

for in the suitors' strength these men stood out as the bravest,
all who were still alive and were fighting around for their life-breath;

all the others already the bow and the thick-falling arrows had mastered.

Then Agelaus addressed them, declaring his word to them all there:

“Friends, now at last this man will have his irresistible hands checked;

yes, and Mentor has gone, after speaking his empty assurances,
and they are left there alone by the first of the doorway's panels.

Therefore do not all of you cast your long spears together;

no, come, let six men first let fly, if perhaps Zeus may grant it
that Odysseus be struck and that glory be won for ourselves here.

For the rest are no care, once this man has fallen before us.”
So he spoke, and they all, as he bade them, hurled their spears eager;

but Athena made all of them vain and deprived them of issue.

One man's spear struck fast in the post of the stout-built great hall there,
another man's struck in the door that was closely and strongly fitted;

another man's bronze-heavy ash shaft fell in against the wall there.

But when they had escaped from the suitors' shower of spears then,
to his own men then first spoke out the long-suffering godlike Odysseus:

“Friends, now I think it is time that I speak and direct all among us
to cast at the throng of the suitors, who yearn in their spirit
to kill the two of us, on top of the evils before this.”
So he spoke, and they all let fly their sharp spears together,
aiming straight before them.

Odysseus struck Demoptolemus,
Telemachus killed Euryades;

Elatus fell to the swineherd,
and the master of cattle killed Peisander there also.

Then all of them together bit down on the monstrous floor there;

and the suitors recoiled to the innermost part of the chamber.

But those men rushed upon them and pulled out their spears from the corpses.

Then again did the suitors let fly their sharp spears eager,
but Athena made many of these as well to fail of their issue.

One man's spear struck fast in the post of the stout-built great hall there,
another man's struck in the door that was closely and strongly fitted;

another man's bronze-heavy ash shaft fell in against the wall there.

But Amphimedon struck Telemachus there on the wrist of his hand, just
grazing him, and the bronze only nicked the skin at the extremity.

And Ctesippus over the shield with his long spear then struck at
Eumaeus' shoulder, but it flew past and fell on the earth there.

Then those men around wise-hearted Odysseus of many devices
cast their sharp spears back in among the crowd of the suitors.