“I and Telemachus here will restrain the proud suitors within doors,
even though in their fury they long with all might for the fighting.

You two, twisting around both his feet and his hands from behind him,
cast him into the chamber, and fasten the planks at his backside;

then let a braided rope be made fast there firmly upon him,
haul him up the tall pillar and draw him close to the roofbeams,
so that alive for long he may suffer afflictions and anguish.”
So he spoke, and the two of them listened with care and obeyed him;

off to the chamber they went, and the man there inside did not see them.

There in the innermost part of the chamber he searched among armor,
while the two took their stand on each side by the doorposts and waited.

But when over the threshold stepped Melanthius, goatherd and traitor,
in the one hand bearing a well-made helmet of beauty and brightness,
and in the other a broad old shield, all stained by the mildew,
once of the hero Laertes, which he in his young days had carried;

now it had long lain unused, and the seams of its straps were all loosened.

Then with a rush the two men seized him and dragged him back inward
by the hair, and cast him down on the floor, though his heart was in anguish,
and they bound together his feet and his hands with a painful binding,
wrenching them hard behind him and throughly, just as he was ordered
by the son of Laertes, enduring Odysseus the noble.

Then to him they made fast a braided rope in its plaiting,
hauled him up the tall pillar and drew him close to the roofbeams.

Then in mockery you spoke to him, Eumaeus the swineherd:

“Now beyond all doubt, Melanthius, you will keep watch through the nightlong,
lying at ease on a soft bed, as indeed is fit and becoming;

nor will Dawn, early-born by the streams of the Ocean, escape you
when she comes on her golden throne, at the hour when you drive in
goats for the suitors throughout the house, to prepare them a banquet.”
So there he was left in that place, stretched tight in the deadly binding;

and the two men put on their armor, then shut the bright door of the chamber,
and went back to Odysseus, shrewd in war and in woven devices.

There with fury breathing they stood;

on the threshold were four men,
while there were many besides within the hall, and all were good fighters.

Then came near to them Athena, the daughter of Zeus in her power,
taking the shape of Mentor in stature as well as in speaking.

Odysseus rejoiced when he saw her, and spoke out and addressed her:

“Mentor, ward off destruction, and think on your dear old companion,
who would do good by you always;

and you are my agemate in seasons.”
So he spoke, for he thought it was Pallas Athena who rouses the battle.

But the suitors from their side raised a shout through the hall all together,
and the first one to chide her was Agelaus, son of Damastor:

“Mentor, do not let Odysseus persuade you with words and cajolings
to do battle with suitors and stand in defense of his person.

For I think that our purpose in this way surely will be accomplished:

when we have killed these two, both the father and son, in the hall here,
then you also among them will perish for all that you purpose
to do in the palace;

and you will repay with your own head the payment.

But when by bronze we have stripped the strength from the limbs of you all here,
all your possessions, whatever you have, both within and without doors,
we will mingle with those of Odysseus;

and never your children,
not your sons, shall be left alive in the halls of your household,
nor your daughters, nor your wise-hearted wife walk Ithaca’s city.”
So he spoke, and Athena in the deep heart grew angrier still then,
and she rebuked Odysseus and scolded with wrathful expressions: