“Come here now, rise up, old woman born in the ancient ages,
you who watch over the women servants throughout our great household.

Come now;

my father is calling for you, that he may tell you something.”
So he spoke, and for her the message remained not winged, but heeded.

She opened the doors of the well-inhabited halls there before them,
and she went on her way, while Telemachus led on before her.

Then she found great Odysseus among the bodies of the slaughtered,
splashed with blood and with gore, like a lion
that after feeding on some farm bull comes back from the pasture;

all of his chest and his cheeks on both sides there
are blood-smeared, and fearful he looks when a man meets his visage;

so was Odysseus befouled on his feet and his hands up above them.

Then when she saw the dead men and the boundless blood all around them,
straightway she longed to cry out aloud, for she saw a great action;

but Odysseus checked and restrained her, eager though she was,
and calling to her he spoke with winged words in address there:

“In your heart, old woman, rejoice, but hold back and do not cry out;

it is not holy to boast above men who have been slaughtered.

These men the gods’ destiny crushed, and their own brutal actions;

they did not honor any earth-dwelling mortal,
neither the bad nor the good, whoever came there among them;

therefore through their own reckless sins they drew on shameful destruction.

But come now, tell me the women that are here in the chambers,
those who dishonor me, and those who are guiltless and faithful.”
Then in reply the dear nurse Eurycleia addressed him:

“Therefore, my child, I will tell you the truth of the matter.

There are fifty women for you in the halls of the household,
serving-women, whom we have taught to attend to their labors,
both to card out the wool and endure the hardship of bondage.

Of these, twelve have all taken to shameless behavior;

they respect neither me nor Penelope our lady.

Telemachus recently grew to manhood, yet his mother
would not allow him to rule with authority over the women.

But come, let me go up to the shining room in the upper story
and tell your wife, on whom some god has cast a deep slumber.”
Then in reply spoke Odysseus of the many devices:

“Do not awaken her yet;

but tell the women here
to come, those very ones who before were devising vile actions.”
So he spoke, and the old nurse went through the hall of the dwelling,
carrying the word to the women and urging them to come forward.

Then to his side he summoned Telemachus, also the cowherd
and the swineherd, and spoke to them winged words in address there:

“Now begin carrying out the dead, and order the women to help you;

after that let them cleanse the beautiful chairs and the tables
using water and sponges that are pierced with many holes.

Then when you have set in order the whole house completely,
lead out the serving-women from the firm-built hall of the household,
to the place between the round room and the excellent fence of the courtyard,
there to strike them with long-edged swords until every one perishes,
till you have taken the life from them and they have forgotten Aphrodite,
whom beneath the suitors they had and enjoyed in secret coupling.”
So he spoke, and the women came in a cluster together,
wailing most terribly, shedding abundant tears in their anguish.

First of all they carried the dead men, the ones who were slaughtered,
and laid them down beneath the portico there in the fenced courtyard,
leaning them on one another;

Odysseus gave orders
himself and kept urging them on;

and they bore them by compulsion.

After that they cleansed the beautiful chairs and the tables
using water and sponges that were pierced with many holes.