Then resourceful Odysseus stripped off the rags from his body,
sprang to the great high threshold, with bow in hand and the quiver
full of arrows, and poured the swift shafts out there in a cluster
down at his feet, and then among all the suitors he told them:

“Here is a trial accomplished, a feat beyond all contending.

Now I shall aim at another mark, that no mortal has hit yet,
if I can strike it, if Apollo grants me the glory.”
So he spoke, and he sighted the bitter shaft straight at Antinous.

He was just then on the point of lifting a beautiful goblet,
golden, with handles on both sides, and turning it there in his fingers
so he might drink of the wine;

but slaughter was not in his spirit.

Who among men at a feast would ever have thought that a single
man in the midst of so many, even though he were mighty,
would bring upon him evil death and the black doom with it?

But Odysseus, taking full aim at his throat, shot the arrow,
and clean through the tender neck went the point of the weapon.

Sideways he toppled, and down from his hand fell the cup when it struck him;

straight from his nostrils a thick jet rose up of dark blood,
blood of a man, and quickly he kicked the table away from him,
thrusting it off with his foot, and all the provisions spilled earthward.

Bread and the roasted meats were befouled.

Then all the suitors
raised a great uproar through the hall when they saw the man fallen.

Up from their chairs they sprang in confusion about the chamber,
glancing around in all directions toward the well-fashioned walling.

Nowhere at hand was a shield, nowhere a stout spear to snatch up.

Then they reviled Odysseus in furious words and in anger:

“Stranger, you shoot at men to your ruin.

No longer will any
other contests confront you.

Now your steep death is upon you.

For indeed now you have killed the man who was far the noblest
youth among all in Ithaca.

Vultures here will devour you.”
So each man imagined, since they supposed he had not meant murder,
meaning to kill the man by no design.

But the fools did not see this,
that for them all alike the cords of destruction were fastened.

Then with a lowering gaze spoke out resourceful Odysseus:

“Dogs, you never expected that I should come home here again from
Troy and the land of her people, and so you laid waste to my household;

with my serving women you forced yourselves down into bed there,
and while I yet lived you sought to win my wife for your own use,
having no fear of the gods who possess the broad heaven above us,
nor of any revenge from mankind that would come upon you later.

Now for you all alike the cords of destruction are fastened.”
So he spoke, and pale fear seized hold of them, every one of them.

Each man peered all around for some way to flee steep destruction.

Then Eurymachus alone made answer and spoke in reply to him:

“If indeed you are truly Odysseus, the Ithacan, home now,
then what you have spoken is just, for the Achaeans have done these
many reckless things in your halls, and many also in the farmland.

But now here lies the man who was cause of the whole thing,
Antinous.

He it was who urged on these actions among us,
not that he needed this marriage so much, nor greatly desired it,
but with another design, which the son of Cronos denied him:

that he himself might reign in the land of well-builded Ithaca,
and in ambush kill your son and so make himself master.

Now he lies in his fate.

But spare your people, I beg you;

we in the land hereafter will make due amends before all men
for whatever was drunk and devoured in your halls by the suitors.

Each of us bringing a price of twenty oxen in payment,
bronze and gold shall repay you, until at last your heart softens.