even that vessel the wave would have hurled on the powerful rock face,
but lady Hera conveyed her beyond, for Jason was dear to the goddess.

On the other side there are two crags;

one climbs into wide heaven,
ending in one sharp summit, and round it a dark-colored cloud bank
never withdraws, nor does clear air ever encircle the summit,
neither in summer’s season nor harvest’s ripening weather.

No mortal man could ascend it or set down a foot on the summit,
not if his hands were twenty in number, his feet were also twenty;

smoothly the rock face rises, as though it were polished completely.

There in the middle part of the crag is a cave filled with vapor,
facing toward the darkness of Erebus, and in its direction
you must steer the hollow vessel, O shining and noble Odysseus.

Even a powerful archer who shot from a hollow black vessel
could not cast the arrow as high as the vaulted cavern above him.

Scylla inhabits the cave, and she makes a horrible yelping.

Truly her voice is no greater than that of a newly born puppy,
yet she herself is an evil monster;

nobody can see her
ever with joy, not even a god should an immortal meet her.

Twelve are the feet that she has, and each one dangles beneath her;

six are the necks she possesses, immensely long, and on each neck
sits one hideous head, and the teeth stand in three crowded rows there,
crowded and thick, and containing the blackest destruction within them.

Up to her middle she stands in the hollow cave that encloses
her, but the heads are extended outside of the terrible chasm;

there she is fishing, her ravenous hunger exploring the crag face,
hunting for dogfish and dolphins and any enormous sea-creature
she may catch from the thousands loud Amphitrite is feeding.

No seafaring sailors can boast they escaped from beside her
wholly unharmed in their ship, since every head of the monster
carries away one man who is snatched from the dark-blue-prowed vessel.

Lower in height is the other crag;

you will see it, Odysseus,
close to the first, at a distance a bowshot can easily travel.

There is a great fig tree upon it, abundantly leafy;

under it shining Charybdis swallows the dark-colored water.

Three times a day she spits it, and three times terribly swallows.

May you not come to the place at the time she is swallowing water;

no one could rescue you then, not even the shaker of earth-land.

No, draw as close as you can to the crag where Scylla is living,
quickly drive past in your vessel;

for it is exceedingly better
six of the men in your vessel should die than your whole band together.”
Thus did she speak, and I answered the goddess and said in response then:

“Goddess, come tell me this other, and speak with the truth as I ask you:

might I in any way slip from below death-dealing Charybdis,
then stand off Scylla and fight when she comes for my faithful companions?”
Thus did I speak, and at once the radiant goddess responded:

“Hardy man, your heart even now is concerned with the works of the war-god,
also with struggle.

Will you not yield to the deathless immortals?

Scylla is no mortal creature, but evil immortal,
terrible, grim and savage, a thing that can never be battled.

There is no defense;

in fleeing from her lies the greatest of courage.

If by the crag you remain for a moment to put on your armor,
then, as I fear, she may dart once again from the cave and attack you,
seize with all six heads and carry six more of your men there.

Row with all strength you possess, and invoke the divine Crataeis,
mother of Scylla, who bore her to serve as a plague upon mortals;

she will restrain her from darting a second time to attack you.