When early Dawn had appeared with her beautiful rose-colored fingers,
then we dragged up the ship and secured her within a deep cavern,
there where the nymphs had beautiful seats and their dances assembled.

Then I called all my companions together and spoke and addressed them:

“Friends, there is food and there also is drink in the swift-running vessel;

therefore keep hands from the cattle, lest terrible harm come upon us.

These are the cattle and powerful sheep of a terrible godhead,
Helios, lord who sees all things and hears every utterance.”
Thus did I speak, and their proud hearts consented and yielded within them.

Then for an entire month the South Wind blew without ceasing;

never another wind rose but the East Wind and powerful South Wind.

While there remained any bread in the ship or the fire-colored red wine,
all kept their hands from the cattle because of desire for their lifebreath.

Yet when all of the food in the swift-running vessel was eaten,
need compelled them to wander abroad in pursuit of their quarry,
fishing and hunting for birds, whatever came into their dear hands,
using the curving hooks, while the hunger consumed every belly.

Then I proceeded away up the island, desiring to offer
prayers to the gods, in the hope one might show me a path to my homeland.

When, going over the island, I left my companions behind me,
then I washed both my hands in a shelter secure from the windstorm;

there I prayed to all of the gods who possess great Olympus,
but they poured down a sweetness of sleep on the lids of my eyes there.

Then did Eurylochus give his companions a ruinous counsel:

“Hear these words, my comrades, although you are suffering hardship.

Every manner of death is hateful to miserable mortals,
but to die from hunger and meet with one’s doom is most pitiful.

Come then, let us drive away for ourselves the best cattle of Helios,
sacrificing these to the deathless gods of the wide-ruling heavens.

If we arrive at Ithaca, land of our fathers, we straightway
shall build a splendid temple to lord Hyperion’s Helios,
setting inside many beautiful offerings, costly and precious.

But if in anger because of the straight-horned cattle he wills to
shatter our ship, and the other immortals consent to his purpose,
I would prefer with one gulp of the wave to surrender my lifebreath,
rather than slowly to starve on an island abandoned and empty.”
Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the other companions approved him.

Swiftly they drove the best of the cattle of Helios toward them,
grazing nearby, since not at a distance from our dark-blue-prowed
vessel the beautiful broad-browed cattle with curved horns were grazing.

Standing around the victims, they prayed to the gods, and they plucked there
tender young leaves from the crown of an oak tree that towered above them,
since no white barley remained in the well-benched vessel for worship.

After they prayed and had cut all the throats and had skinned the dead victims,
then they cut out the thigh bones and wrapped them with fat in abundance,
folding it double, and over the fat placed pieces of raw meat.

Since they had no wine to pour in libation on blazing oblations,
water they poured, and they roasted the inward parts over the fire.

After the thigh bones burned and they tasted the entrails together,
then they cut all that remained into pieces and threaded the spit-rods.

Then did the sleep of great depth fly off from the lids of my eyes there;

down to the swift-running ship and the shore of the sea I proceeded.

But as I came in my walking to where the curved vessel was waiting,
round me the sweet-smelling cloud of the fat’s smoke suddenly drifted.

Groaning aloud, I cried to the deathless gods in my sorrow: