they raised the clear song of enchantment:

“Come, much-praised Odysseus, magnificent glory of Argos;

stay your ship here, so that you may hear both of our voices.

Never has any man rowed this way in his black ship
till from our lips he has heard the honey-sweet voice of our singing;

no, he takes his delight and proceeds on his way with more knowledge.

Well do we know every deed that throughout wide Troy the Achaeans
and all the Trojans endured and accomplished by will of immortals;

well do we know every thing that occurs on the nourishing earth-land.”
Thus did they sing as they sent from the meadow their beautiful voices;

then my heart longed terribly to hear, and I ordered the comrades
there to release me, signaling them with my eyebrows;

but forward
they bent and rowed, and Perimedes arose with Eurylochus quickly,
binding me down with a greater number of bonds and constricting.

After they rowed far beyond them, and no longer there could we hear the
voices of both Sirens or sound of the beautiful singing,
swiftly my faithful companions removed every piece of the beeswax
I had used in stopping their ears, and released me from bondage.

But when the island was left out of sight, then immediately smoke I
saw, with a mighty wave, and a booming arose in the distance.
Terror possessed all the men; from their hands the oars went flying,
clattering down in the current, and there the vessel stopped moving,
since with their hands they no longer compelled the tapered oar-blades.
I made my way through the ship and encouraged the faithful companions,
standing beside every man and exhorting him gently in order:
“Friends, we are certainly not unacquainted with evils and hardships.
This is no greater an evil than when in his powerful cavern
Cyclops confined us by terrible force, and yet from the cave there,
aided by my great prowess and counsel and thoughtful perception,
all we escaped. Some day, I imagine, we shall remember this also.
Come now, every one of you do precisely the thing I command you.
You, at the benches remain, and strike on the deep-running sea-surf
strongly with all of your oar blades, in hope father Zeus may be willing
somehow to grant us escape from the doom of this present destruction.
You, master steersman, I give this command, and you store it within you,
since in your own hands you hold the steering oar of the hollow
ship: keep the vessel outside of that smoke and the surf of the water;
hold to the crag, lest before you perceive it she suddenly races
off to the opposite side and you throw all of us in the evil.”
Thus did I speak, and the men gave heed to the word I had spoken.
Yet of Scylla I did not tell, of that inescapable horror,
fearing that all my companions, becoming terrified, might abandon
oars and go packing themselves in the hold of the vessel together.
Then I forgot Circe’s difficult order, that I should in no way
put on my armor and fight; I forgot every word that she told me.
Quickly I put on the armor that made me renowned and took two great
spears in my hands, and ascended the half-deck forward above them;
there I expected that she would be first to appear to my vision,
rock-dwelling Scylla, who brought the destruction upon my companions.
Nowhere could I perceive her, although both eyes became weary,
scanning each handbreadth of rock that was covered in dark-colored vapor.