Then you will reach Thrinacia’s island, and there in abundance
graze Helios’ cattle with all of his strong-fleeced sheep-flocks,
seven herds of the cattle and also as many beautiful sheep-flocks,
fifty in each;

they produce no young and are never diminished.

Goddesses tend them as shepherds, the nymphs with beautiful tresses,
Lampetie together with lovely Phaethusa, daughters
born to the lord Hyperion’s Helios by shining Neaera.

She, when their honored mother had borne them and carefully reared them,
settled them far from her side on Thrinacia’s distant island,
there to preserve all the crook-horned cattle and sheep of their father.

If you leave these all unharmed and remember your difficult homeward
journey, you still may arrive upon Ithaca, suffering greatly.

But if you harm them, I prophesy utter destruction
both for your ship and companions;

and even if you should escape it,
late will you come and in evil condition, with all comrades lost there.”
Thus did she speak;

and at once came Dawn on her gold-glimmering throne-seat.

Then she proceeded away up the island, the radiant goddess;

I made my way to the ship and aroused my companions from slumber,
bidding them board in their turn and release every stern-fastened cable.

Swiftly they came on the ship and sat down by the tholes of the oarlocks;

sitting in order, they struck with the polished oars on the gray brine.

Circe behind our vessel, the dark-blue-prowed ship of the seaway,
sent us a following wind that filled out the sail, a companion
excellent, Circe of beautiful hair, dread goddess, humanly speaking.

Then, when we carefully tended the tackle throughout the black vessel,
taking our seats, we were borne on our way by the wind and the steersman.

Grieving at heart, I addressed the companions who sat in the vessel:

“Friends, it is not fitting that only one man or two men
know of the fates that the radiant goddess Circe revealed me;

therefore I speak, so that knowing them all we may either be dying,
or turn aside from the death and destruction and make our escape there.

First she commanded avoidance of marvelous Sirens, the beautiful
voices they have and the flowering meadow where both sit together.

Me she alone gave leave to be hearing their song, but you others
bind me in painful bonds, so I stay unmoving before you,
upright against the mast-step, with ends of the rope round the mast-tree.

If I entreat you and order the men to release me from bondage,
then you must bind me down with a greater number of bonds there.”
Everything thus I explained as I spoke to the faithful companions,
while the well-constructed ship kept running with speed on the water,
nearing the island of both Sirens, compelled by the fair wind.

Suddenly there the wind came to rest, and a breathless and perfect
calmness arose, for a god lulled all of the waves into slumber.

Then the companions arose and furled up the sails of the vessel,
stowed them away in the hollow ship, and sat down by the oar-blades,
whitening water around them with polished fir oars in their rowing.

I with the edge of the bronze cut pieces from one rounded wax cake,
small in their size, and I kneaded them all in my powerful fingers;

quickly the wax grew warm, compelled by the strength I exerted,
also the beam of the lord Hyperion’s Helios, sun-god.

Then, going man after man, I stopped both ears of my comrades.

They in the vessel bound both my hands and my feet there together,
upright against the mast-step, with ends of the rope round the mast-tree;

sitting in order, they struck with the polished oars on the gray brine.

When we had gone as far as the cry of a man can be carried,
swift in our course, our sea-running vessel did not pass unnoticed,
leaping beside their island;