“Father Zeus, and you other blessed gods who live forever,
for my destruction, it seems, you put me in pitiless slumber,
while my companions remained and devised this monstrous transgression.”
Swiftly the message was carried to lord Hyperion’s Helios;

long-robed Lampetie brought him the news we had slaughtered his cattle.

Then with his anger aroused he addressed the assembled immortals:

“Father Zeus, and you other blessed gods who live forever,
punish the faithful companions of lord Odysseus, Laertes’
son, for they wickedly slaughtered my cattle, the creatures I always
saw with delight as I climbed into heaven’s star-bearing region,
also whenever I turned from the heavens toward earth and its creatures.

If they do not pay me an equitable price for my cattle,
I shall descend into Hades and shine for the people departed.”
Then cloud-assembling Zeus the almighty responded in answer:

“Helios, shine as before for the deathless immortals above us,
also for mortals who live on the grain-giving fields of the earth-land.

As for the men you accuse, I shall soon strike their swift-moving vessel,
using my glittering thunderbolt, breaking it midmost on wine-dark sea-brine.”
This in the time afterward I heard from Calypso, the fair-haired;

she said she heard the story herself from the guide-god Hermes.

When I had come once again to the ship and the shore of the sea there,
going to every man, I rebuked them, but there was no remedy
anywhere we could discover; the cattle already were lifeless.
Soon the immortals began to display strange signs for the men there:
hides of the cattle crawled, and the meat on the spits gave a lowing,
both what was roasted and raw, and the voice came forth like the cattle’s.
Six days afterward all my faithful companions continued
feasting on Helios’ cattle they stole, the best in the herd there.
But when Zeus, son of Cronus, at last brought the seventh day to us,
only then did the wind desist from the raging strength of the squall-storm.
Swiftly we boarded the vessel and sailed on the broad face of sea-brine,
setting the mast upright and extending the glistening white sails.
After we left the island behind, and no other land there
anywhere showed, but the sea and the heavens extended before us,
then did the son born of Cronus establish a dark-colored cloud bank
over the hollow vessel; the sea turned black underneath it.
She did not run much longer; at once came the shrieking and storming
West Wind, fiercely assaulting the ship with a great howling squall-storm.
Both of the forestays snapped from the powerful blast of the tempest;
backward the mast fell, casting its tackle all into the bilge there.
There in the stern of the ship did the mast strike downward and crush the
head of the steersman, breaking the bones of the skull all together;
just like a diver he dropped from the deck of the vessel to water,
and from his bones immediately fled the proud spirit and lifebreath.
Zeus at the same time thundered and cast his bolt at the vessel;
all of the ship reeled round when struck by the bolt of the thunder-god,
filled with the sulfur’s stench, and the men fell out of the vessel.
Like the sea-crows they were carried around the black hull in the water,
borne on the waves, and the god denied their homeward return there.
Yet I kept moving throughout the ship, till the storm-surge
ripped both of her sides from the keel and a wave carried off the bare bottom,
snapping the mast from the keel; but round that mast had been tangled
still the backstay, a rope that was strongly fashioned of oxhide.
Using the rope, I lashed the two firmly together, mast and the keel-beam;
seated upon them, I drifted along with the terrible windstorms.