After escaping the rocks and the terrible maw of Charybdis,
Scylla as well, we came straightaway to the blameless and sacred
island of Helios’ godhood, and there were the beautiful broad-browed
cattle and numerous powerful sheep of the lord Hyperion.

While on the open sea and aboard the black vessel, I heard the
lowing of cattle returning to folds and the bleating of sheep-flocks.

Then in my heart I remembered the words of the prophet and seer-man,
blind Tiresias, Theban by birth, and the goddess of Aeaea,
Circe, who over and over commanded avoidance of Helios’
island, the land of the sun-god who brings such delight to the mortals.

Grieving at heart, I addressed the companions who sat in the vessel:

“Hear these words, my comrades, although you are suffering hardship,
so I may tell you the prophecies given by lord Tiresias,
also by Circe of Aeaea, who over and over commanded
shunning the island of Helios, bringer of joy to the mortals;

there she declared the most terrible evil is waiting to take us.

Drive the black vessel far from the isle, and continue beyond it.”
Thus did I speak, and their own hearts broke in their bodies completely.

Then did Eurylochus answer me straightaway with his hateful
language:

“Hard is your heart, Odysseus;

your strength is excessive;

none of your limbs ever tires.

You surely are fashioned of iron,
since you refuse to allow your companions, exhausted from labor
and without sleep, to set foot on land, although on this sea-ringed
island at last we could make for ourselves an agreeable supper.

No:

in this state you command us to journey through fast-falling darkness,
wandering out from the isle far away on the vaporous sea-roads.

Terrible winds are engendered from night for destroying the vessels;

how can a man escape from the sheer destruction if suddenly some great
storm of the wind should arise in its power and assault us, a violent
South Wind or hard-blowing West, which more than the others are smashing
vessels apart, even counter to will of the gods and their purpose?

No;

for the present we all should yield to the blackness of nightfall,
making our supper prepared and remaining beside the swift vessel;

when Dawn appears, we shall board her again and sail onto wide sea.”
Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the other companions approved him.

Then I knew well an immortal was plotting an evil against us;

raising my voice, I addressed him, and these words took wing as I uttered:

“Lord Eurylochus, I am only one man, and you force me.

Come then, every one of you swear me a powerful oath here:

if we encounter a herd of the cattle or beautiful great flock
there of the sheep, let no one in terrible blind-minded folly
slaughter a sheep or a cow, but remain there quiet and feed on
all of the food that immortal Circe supplied for our journey.”
Thus did I speak, and at once they swore the strong oath as I ordered.

When they had sworn, and they brought their oath to a proper completion,
then we proceeded to moor the well-constructed ship in a hollow
harbor, beside a spring from which sweet-flowing water was rising.

All the companions went out on the shore and skillfully fashioned supper.

After we put away all desire for eating and drinking,
there they lamented, recalling the faithful companions whom Scylla
snatched from the hollow ship and devoured at the mouth of her cavern;

while they were weeping, a sleep of great depth came down and possessed them.

When in the third watch of night all the stars had gone past the meridian,
Zeus who assembles the clouds raised up an enraged wind upon us,
driving a howling squall, and he covered both sea and the dry land
under a cloud, and the darkness of night came down from the heavens.