yet when the sun had turned toward the time when the oxen are loosened,
then the Cicones routed Achaeans and mastered our army.

Six strong-greaved companions from each of the ships they had slaughtered;

all of the others escaped from the doom that is death and destruction.

There we continued our sailing away with the heart full of sorrow,
glad to be free from death though our well-loved comrades had perished.

Yet I permitted the curving vessels to journey no further,
not till we called three times on each of our pitiful comrades,
those who had died on the plain, struck down by the men of Cicones.

Zeus who was gathering cloud roused North Wind against all our vessels,
driving a howling squall and covering land and the sea-way
under a cloud, and the night rose suddenly out of the heavens.

Ships were carried along sideways;

the sails that they carried were tattered,
ripped by the strength of the wind into three and four pieces of canvas.

Down in the ships we lowered the sails in our terror of death there,
rowing the vessels with power to take them in close to the dry land.

There for two nights long and two whole days without ceasing
down we lay, consuming our hearts with exhaustion and sorrow.

Yet when the beautiful-haired Dawn brought the third day upon us,
setting the masts upright, we opened the white sails above them,
sitting below, while the winds and the helmsmen directed the vessels.

Then I had come without harm to the country I call my own country,
but as I rounded Malea the wave and the sea-current caught me,
while the North Wind drove me away from my course and afar from Cythera.

Nine days there I was carried along by the ruinous storm winds,
over the fish-thronged sea;

on the tenth day we came to the country
held by the Lotus-eaters, a people whose food is a flower.

There we set foot on the dry land and drew up an ample supply of
water, and quickly my men took their meal at the side of the swift ships.

Then, when we tasted our measure of food and the drink we were given,
I sent several companions ahead of the others to find out
what kind of men in the country were eating their bread on the earth there.

Two men I chose for the journey and added a third as their herald.

Straightway they went and encountered the men of the Lotus-eaters.

These Lotus-eaters intended no death for the men who had found them;

rather they gave my companions some lotus flower to taste there.

Whoever ate of the honey-sweet fruit of the lotus among them
wanted no longer to carry us word or return to his vessel;

there they desired to stay in the midst of the Lotus-eaters,
feeding upon the lotus and letting the thought of homecoming vanish.

These men I forced to return, though they wept as I brought them to shipboard,
dragging them under the benches and binding them there in the hollow
ships, and I ordered the rest of my faithful companions to hurry,
all of them boarding the swift-faring ships with no further delay there,
lest any other should eat of the lotus and lose his homecoming.

Straightway the men came aboard and sat at the oarlocks in order;

sitting in orderly fashion, they struck the gray sea with the oar-blades.

There we continued our sailing away with the heart full of sorrow,
coming at last to the land of the lawless and proud Cyclopes,
overbearing people who trust in the deathless immortals.

Nothing they plant with their hands and no ground they plow for a harvest;

everything grows for the people without being planted or plowed there,
wheat and barley and vines that are carrying heavy grape-clusters,
swelling for them into wine through the rain Zeus sends from the heavens.

Neither assemblies for council have they nor established commandments;