Tell me the place where you moored your beautifully fashioned ship when
coming, whether afar at the end of the shore or nearby, so I know it.”
Thus did he speak to make trial, but much did I know, and he caught me
not in his snare;

and I answered the monster with words of deception:

“Lord of the earth-shaking waters Poseidon destroyed my fine vessel,
driving it into the rocks at the outermost edge of your country;

there on a headland he hurled it, and wind from the sea drove it inward.

Only myself and the men who are here fled the final destruction.”
Thus did I speak, and he answered me not from his pitiless spirit;

springing upon us, he stretched out his hands at the men who were near him,
snatching up two at a time, and like puppies he dashed them on ground there;

brains poured out on the earth and wetted the soil all around them.

Tearing them limb from limb, he made ready his supper and ate them,
just like a lion bred in the mountains, and nothing was left there,
neither the entrails nor flesh nor the bones that were heavy with marrow.

We in our weeping raised up our hands to great Zeus in the heavens,
seeing the terrible deed, while helplessness captured our spirits.

Then, when the Cyclops had filled his enormous belly completely,
feeding on flesh of humanity, drinking unmixed milk beside it,
stretched in the cavern he lay in the midst of the sheep he had gathered.

Then in the depth of my own great-hearted spirit I pondered,
going up close and unsheathing the sharpened sword at my thigh there,
stabbing him straight through the chest where the midriff encloses the liver,
searching by touch with my hand;

but another reflection restrained me.

There we ourselves would have died in the pitiless final destruction,
since we could never have pushed from the entrance by strength of our two hands
that giant stone he had lifted and placed at the high cave opening.

So we continued in groaning and waited for beautiful Dawn-light.

When early Dawn had appeared with her beautiful rose-colored fingers,
then he enkindled his fire and milked all the excellent livestock,
all in appropriate order, and placed every young one beneath them.

Then, when he rapidly finished the whole of the work he was doing,
snatching up two at a time once again, he made ready his breakfast.

Then, when he fed, he drove all of the fat-lying flocks from the cavern,
lifting the giant door-stone away with an effortless movement,
setting it back like a man who replaces the lid on a quiver.

Whistling loud, then the Cyclops directed his fat-lying livestock
up to the mountain, while I in the cave brooded deeply on evil,
somehow to make him repay, if Athena should grant me the glory.

This, as I pondered, appeared in my thinking to be the best counsel.

Close to a pen there lay an enormous club of the Cyclops,
fashioned of green olive wood;

he had cut it to carry thereafter,
once it was seasoned.

We looked at its size and compared it in judgment
there to the mast of a black-hulled ship with two decades of rowers,
one broad-bellied merchantman crossing the great gulf of ocean;

such was the length and the thickness the timber presented to eyesight.

Standing beside it, I cut off a fathom of length from the timber,
gave it to all my companions and told them to smooth down the surface.

Smoothly they fashioned it;

standing beside them, I sharpened the far end,
then in the fire’s blaze I hardened the point of the timber.

Carefully then I laid it away and concealed it beneath all the dung there,
litter that lay in a thick and abundant heap through the cavern.

Then I commanded the rest of the men to determine by lot-cast
who should have courage beside me to lift up the stake we had fashioned,
grind it around in his eye when the sweetness of sleep came upon him.