Then resourceful Odysseus spoke and addressed him in answer:

“Lord Alcinous, most renowned among all of the people,
truly it is a beautiful thing to attend to a singer
such as the man we have here, with a voice like the gods in its music.

I will declare that no other accomplishment carries more beauty
than when delight and rejoicing possess the whole people together,
while the banqueters sit through the hall and attend to the singer,
each in appropriate order, and tables beside them are laden
thickly with bread and with meats, while the cupbearer draws from the wine bowl,
carries the wine all around and pours it to fill every goblet.

This in my heart and my thinking appears the most beautiful vision.

Yet you have turned your desire to asking about my grievous
troubles, so I may lament and may groan all the more as I tell them.

What shall I speak of at first and what last in relating the story?

Gods who inhabit the heavens have given me sorrows uncounted.

First I shall tell you the name that I bear, so you also may know me,
and so hereafter, if I should flee from the pitiless death-day,
I may be guest-friend to you, though my house lies far in the distance.

I am Odysseus, Laertes’ son, known to all human people
through my designs and my cunning;

my fame has ascended to heaven.

Ithaca is my home, lying clear beneath Neriton’s mountain,
tall and trembling with leaves, and around it are numerous islands,
lying together in clusters, each one very close to another,
Same and forested Zacynthus and Dulichium with them.

Ithaca lies very low and the furthest away on the sea-way,
facing the darkness of evening, while all of the rest face the sunlight,
facing the dawn;

it is rugged, but raises good men, and I cannot
see any sweeter appearance at all than the land of one’s fathers.

Queenly Calypso, the radiant goddess, would hold me beside her
there in the hollow cave, for she longed to possess me as husband;

likewise Circe detained me within her halls in her island,
cunning Aeaean lady, and longed to possess me as husband.

Yet they could never persuade the heart in my breast to remain there.

So it is true there is nothing more sweet than the land of one’s fathers,
nothing more sweet than one’s parents, though someone possesses a wealthy
house in a foreign country, afar from the people who bore him.

Come, I shall tell you as well of the homeward journey and all the
sorrows that Zeus laid on me as homeward I traveled from Trojans.

Out of Ilium wind carried me to the land of Cicones,
into Ismarus;

there I sacked the town and destroyed all the men there.

Out of the city we carried their wives and abundant possessions,
sharing them all, so no man through me was deprived of his portion.

Then I commanded, be sure, that we make our retreat with swift footfall;

great fools, they would not obey me, and paid no regard to my counsel.

Much wine there they were drinking, and many sheep on the seashore
they cut down, and shambling cattle with horns that were curved at the forehead.

Meanwhile, Cicone warriors cried to Cicone neighbors,
those who were living inland, more numerous and better fighters,
skilled in engaging humanity out of the war chariots,
also on foot when the need for the close-standing battle compelled them.

They came thick as the leaves and the flowers that grow in their season,
early at morning;

and then an evil doom sent by great Zeus
stood at our side, unlucky men, to load us with manifold sorrows.

Close to the fast ships they formed their battalions and entered the battle;

each side cast at the other with spears that were headed with bronze-work.

While it was morning and still the sacred daylight was growing,
so long we held them at bay and remained, though more were against us;