blast of the burning completely singed off every eyelid and eyebrow,
while the great eyeball was burning and roots there were crackling with fire.

Just as a smith will dip a magnificent ax head or adze blade
into the cold water, making a terrible hiss as he tempers it,
since it is tempering that gives to iron metal its power,
so round the olive timber his eye made a terrible hissing.

Then he cried out in a terrible giant voice, and the cavern
rang;

we withdrew in our terror;

he wrenched the great stake from his eye there,
all of it fouled with the blood that was streaming from out of the eyeball,
hurled it away, while his arms in a furious agony flailed there,
crying aloud to the Cyclopes living around him in caverns,
those who made homes all along the magnificent wind-beaten highlands.

Hearing his cries, they arrived from every direction around him,
standing outside of the cave and inquiring what trouble possessed him:

“Why, Polyphemus, what pain makes you cry out this way in the darkness,
calling throughout the ambrosial night and preventing our slumber?

Surely no mortal is driving your flocks off against your intention?

Surely no one destroys you by cunning or violence against you?”
Out of the cave strong Polyphemus spoke to them, giving an answer:

“Friends, now Nobody kills me by cunning, and not by his power!”
Then in their turn they responded to him with the words that took wing there:

“If no one forces you now, when you sit all alone in the cavern,
sickness from mighty Zeus must possess you, and none can escape it.

Pray to Poseidon our father, the lord who encircles the earth-land.”
Thus did they speak as they went;

and the heart in my body was laughing,
seeing my false name and flawless design had completely deceived him.

Yet in his agony, groaning and heaving, the Cyclops was groping,
feeling with hands as he lifted the stone from the cave’s great entrance.

Down in the doorway he sat with his two arms widely extended,
hoping to catch any man who attempted to flee with the sheep-flocks;

such was the fool he expected, perhaps, he would find me to be there.

Yet I was planning the means by which all things might come to the best end,
somehow discovering freedom from death for the whole of my comrades
also myself;

every guile and device I was weaving together,
just as a man for his life, since the mighty affliction was near us.

This, as I pondered, appeared in my thinking to be the best counsel.

Rams were there with an excellent feeding, and heavy with thick wool,
beautiful, mighty animals, covered with dark-violet fleeces.

Silently these I bound in a group with the pliable willow
withes whereon that monstrous and lawless creature was sleeping,
three in a group, with the middle ram carrying one of my comrades,
other two walking upon either side to protect him from capture.

Thus every man had three, but for me there remained a great ram there,
one that was far beyond all other sheep in the whole of the livestock.

Catching the ram by his back, I curled underneath the great shaggy
belly and waited, my hands in the marvelous fleece of the ram there
twisted and tightly held, while my heart remained steadfast and patient.

So we continued in groaning and waited for beautiful Dawn-light.

When early Dawn had appeared with her beautiful rose-colored fingers,
then all the male animals poured out of the cave to the pasture;

females not milked were bleating around all the pens, since their udders
almost were bursting.

Their master, afflicted by terrible anguish,
felt with his hands every back of the sheep that arose and went outward;

yet in his foolishness never he learned that the men were beneath them,
bound underneath the breasts of his own woolly sheep as they traveled.