Last in the flock that magnificent ram made his way through the doorway,
burdened by wool and by me and the thoughts that were crowding within me.

Strong Polyphemus felt over the ram and addressed him directly:

“Sweetheart, my old ram, why are you last out of all of the flock now,
passing outside of the cave?

You were never before one to linger;

always the first, taking long strides outward to graze on the tender
flowering grass, and the first of the animals reaching the river,
first in your longing to turn once again to the fold in the evening.

Now you are last of them all.

Do you grieve for the eye of your master,
blinded by one worthless man and the pitiful men who attended,
after with wine he had broken my wits and my reason completely,
Nobody, who has not yet, I assure you, escaped his destruction?

If you could think as I do, if only a voice could be given you,
telling me where that man flees to avoid my avenging anger,
then would his brains be dashed on the floor and be scattered around the
cave, and the heart in my body would find some release from the evil
brought on me now by this worthless and weakling Nobody creature.”
Thus having spoken, he sent the great ram from himself through the doorway.

Then, when we came a small distance away from the cave and the courtyard,
first I released myself from the ram and then freed my companions.

Rapidly then we drove all the long-legged sheep that were fattened,
often looking behind as we turned, till at last we arrived at the vessel.

We were a welcome appearance to all our beloved companions,
we who escaped from destruction, but all for the dead men lamented.

This I allowed not;

frowning, I held back the tears of each man there,
ordering all of them rapidly into the ship to be throwing
excellent-fleeced sheep in abundance and sail on the salt-colored water.

Straightway the men came aboard and sat at the oarlocks in order;

sitting in orderly fashion, they struck the gray sea with the oar-blades.

Yet when we came as far out from the land as a loud-shouting voice goes,
then I called out to the Cyclops and mocked him with taunting language:

“Cyclops, the men you intended to eat with tremendous exertion
there in the hollow cave were not weak man’s companions, as it proved.

Surely your wicked deeds were destined to find and repay you,
pitiless creature, who shrank not from eating the guests in your household;

therefore has Zeus now punished you, he and the other immortals.”
Thus did I speak, and it angered the heart in his body still further.

Tearing the peak from a mighty mountain, he hurled it against us,
sending it down just in front of the dark-blue prow of the vessel,
barely missing the end of the steering oar as it landed.

Sea was uplifted beneath the great rock that had fallen upon it;

backwash straightway carried the vessel back into the dry land,
flooding from out of the deep, and it drove us again to the shoreline.

Yet in my two hands I seized up a long pole there from the vessel,
pushing her outward, and urgently roused my companions around me,
telling them all to bend into oars and escape from the evil,
nodding repeatedly hard with my head;

at the oars they were bending.

Yet when we came twice as far out over the salt-colored water,
then once again I intended to call;

but the men who were round me
tried with their honey-sweet language to hold me, this man and another:

“Pitiless man, why ever provoke such a savage and wild one,
one who by throwing a rock in the sea has already propelled our
ship once again to the shore, where we thought our destruction was certain?