There from the first my companions entreated and urgently begged me,
taking the cheeses to leave and return;

then rapidly driving
kids and the lambs from the pens where they waited, to take them to shipboard,
sail once again with the swift ship out on the salt-colored sea-way.

Yet I refused to attend to their words, though it had been far better,
not until I should behold him myself and discover if guest-gifts
he would provide;

his appearance would bring my companions no gladness.

There we enkindled a fire and gave to the gods an oblation,
taking the cheeses ourselves and eating;

we sat there awaiting
him till at last he came shepherding homeward and carried a mighty
weight of the dry wood to use when the time should arrive for his supper.

Down in the cavern he hurled it, producing a thunderous crashing;

we in our terror withdrew to the furthest recess of the cavern.

Into the wide cave he drove all his flocks that were fattened for milking,
every ewe and she-goat, while the males he had left in the courtyard,
rams and the he-goats remaining outside in the deep-sided enclosure.

Then he lifted on high and positioned a giant rock for the doorway,
massive in weight;

not even two-and-twenty excellent wagons,
each with four wheels, could have lifted that stone from the ground there,
such was the towering cliff of the rock that he set in the entrance.

Sitting thereafter, he milked every ewe and the bleating she-goats,
all in appropriate order, and placed every young one beneath them.

Straightway then he curdled one half of the gleaming white milk there,
gathering all and storing the curds in the baskets of wicker;

half he positioned in vessels, so always the drink might be ready
there to be taken and used at the time when he wanted his supper.

Then, when he rapidly finished the whole of the work he was doing,
lighting the fire, he saw us and asked us a question directly:

“Strangers, who are you, and whence have you sailed over watery pathways?

Are you engaged upon business, or do you wander without aim,
just as sea-plundering men, who are roaming across the salt water,
risking their lives while they carry affliction to people of strange lands?”
Thus did he speak, and the hearts in the depth of our bodies were broken,
frightened by depth of his voice and the monstrous form of his body.

Even so, I spoke to the giant and answered his question:

“We are Achaeans driven away from our course out of Troy-land,
carried by every wind that is found on the great gulf of ocean.

Homeward we traveled, but came by a different road and a strange path;

Zeus, I suppose, has chosen to fashion the matter in this way.

We are proud to be people of Atreus’ son Agamemnon,
whose fame now is the greatest of all things beneath the broad heaven,
since was the city he sacked so great and so many the people
whom he destroyed.

We have come for our part to embrace both your knees here,
hoping that you will provide us with friendship or give us another
gift, as the right and the custom demand for the welcoming stranger.

Mighty one, honor the gods;

we stand in your presence as suppliants.

Zeus is avenger of all who arrive as suppliants and strangers,
Zeus of the Strangers, who travels beside all guests deserving of honor.”
Thus did I speak, and he answered me straightway with pitiless spirit:

“Surely a fool you must be, foreign man, or have come from a far land,
telling me I should fear all the gods and avoid their displeasure.

We of the Cyclopes care not for Zeus who possesses the aegis,
neither for blessed gods, for greatly by far we declare we are better.

Never to flee from the hatred of Zeus would I spare you or spare your
comrades, unless the heart in my breast of its own should command me.