Then the sun entered the west and the darkness descended around us;

there we lay down to sleep on the surf-line there at the seashore.

When early Dawn had appeared with her beautiful rose-colored fingers,
then I called all my men in assembly and spoke to them openly:

“All of the rest of you wait in this place, my companions and faithful;

I with the crew in my ship alone shall make trial of the people,
going to learn who the people are there and the manner they follow,
whether they are overbearing and savage and strangers to justice,
or they are friendly to strangers, with god-fearing hearts in their bodies.”
Thus having spoken, I boarded my ship and commanded my comrades
into the vessel to board in their turn and release all the stern ropes.

Straightway the men came aboard and sat at the oarlocks in order;

sitting in orderly fashion, they struck the gray sea with the oar-blades.

Yet when we came to the place, which was not far away on the water,
there at the edge of the land and beside the salt sea we discovered
one lofty cave overhung with the laurels, and numerous livestock,
sheep and goats, would be penned there at night;

and a high-rising courtyard
ran all around it, constructed of stones dug deep in the earth there,
also of towering pines and magnificent high-crested oak trees.

There slept a monstrous man who was shepherding all of his livestock
only himself and apart;

with others he kept no companionship,
standing aloof, for the heart in his body was stranger to law there.

He was fashioned a monstrous wonder, and had no resemblance
to any man who eats bread, but looked like a forested mountain
crag that is standing alone, high over the neighboring ridges.

Then I commanded the rest of my faithful companions to stay there,
close to the ship, and provide their defense for the ship while I journeyed,
choosing the twelve most excellent men from among my companions.

Thus I went forward, and carried a goatskin filled with dark wine there,
sweet wine given to me by Maron, the son of Euanthes,
priest of Apollo, the god who protected the town of Ismarus,
since we protected the priest with his child and the wife of his household,
holding him sacred, for there in the forested grove he was living,
grove of Phoebus Apollo.

He gave me magnificent presents:

seven full talents of gold that was wrought with the skill of the craftsman,
also a mixing bowl made wholly of silver he gave me;

then he drew wine into twelve great jars with two handles,
sweet and unmixed, like a drink for the gods.

Not a slave in the household,
neither a serving woman, had knowledge that such wine existed;

only the man and the wife he loved and a single housekeeper.

Whenever they drank of this honey-sweet red-colored wine there,
one cup he filled and poured into twenty full measures of water;

sweetly the fragrance arose from the bowl where the wine had been mingled,
marvelous, and no pleasure remained in abstaining from drinking.

Thereof I filled a great skin and carried provisions beside it,
held in a sack, for my proud heart even then was foreboding
someone would come upon us who carried tremendous power in his body,
savage of spirit and knowing no judgment or law among mortals.

Rapidly then we approached the great cave and discovered him absent;

out in the pasture he shepherded all of his fat-lying livestock.

Into the cave we went and gazed on all things in wonder:

crates that were heavy with cheeses and pens that were crowded with young ones,
filled with the lambs and the kids, each kind being folded apart there,
firstborn kept to themselves and those of the middle birth separate,
newborn kept to themselves, and the vessels were swimming with whey there,
buckets and bowls fashioned well, all the vessels he used in the milking.