If he had heard anyone speaking aloud or a voice of a mortal,
heads he would shatter together with all of the timbers of shipwork,
casting a jagged boulder, since such is the distance he throws them.”
Thus did they speak, but they never persuaded my great-hearted spirit;

once more I called to the monster, with anger at heart as I spoke there:

“Cyclops, if anyone born among mortal humanity asks you
who brought the shameful and blinding destruction that fell on your eyesight,
tell him Odysseus, sacker of cities, has blinded your vision,
son of Laertes, whose house is established in Ithaca’s country.”
Thus did I speak;

with a groan he addressed me and offered an answer:

“Sorrow, an ancient prophecy now has arrived at completion!

Once there was here a prophetic man, both mighty and noble,
Telemus, son of Eurymus, one who excelled in his seercraft,
practicing prophecy till he grew old in the land of Cyclopes.

He told me all of these things would arrive at fulfillment hereafter,
how I should lose all my eyesight by hand of a man named Odysseus.

Yet I expected a mighty and beautiful man to approach me,
one who was clothed in his body with strength that was greatly tremendous;

now one little and worthless and utterly powerless weakling
blinded my eye after crushing my wits through the wine he provided.

Come to me, lord Odysseus, so I may give you a guest-gift;

I shall entreat the renowned Earth-shaker to grant your returning.

I am his son, and the god has declared he is father who sired me.

He, if he wills it, himself shall heal me, and no other being,
neither the blessed divinities nor any man who is mortal.”
Thus did he speak, and I spoke to the monster and offered an answer:

“Would I possessed such strength to deprive you of spirit and lifetime,
sending you down to the house of great Hades, as surely as even
lord of the earth-shaking waters shall never restore the eye you have lost here.”
Thus did I speak;

then he prayed to Poseidon, the lord of the sea-depth,
stretching his two hands up to the heavens that glittered with starlight:

“Hear me, Poseidon who circles the earth-land, dark-haired immortal;

if I am truly your son and you say you are father who sired me,
grant that Odysseus, sacker of cities, shall never arrive home,
son of Laertes, whose house is established in Ithaca’s country.

Yet if his destiny grants that he see the beloved companions,
coming again to his well-built house in the land of his fathers,
late may he come and in evil condition, with all comrades perished,
there on another man’s ship, and discover affliction at home there.”
Thus did he speak in his prayer, and the dark-haired god heard the prayer.

Then once again the great Cyclops took up an even greater
rock and he whirled and released it with measureless strength in his throwing,
bringing it down just behind the dark-blue stern of the vessel,
barely missing the end of the steering oar as it landed.

Sea was uplifted beneath the great rock that had fallen upon it;

wave carried forward the vessel and drove it toward the far island.

Then, when we came to the island where all of the other well-benched ships
waited together, and where all around them our faithful companions
sat there lamenting and always awaited the sight of our vessel,
there on the sands we drove in the ship and secured it on shoreline,
stepping ourselves to the surf-line there at the edge of the sea-way.

Taking the Cyclops’ flocks from the hollow and curve-sided vessel,
sharing we gave every man his portion, and none was defrauded.

Yet that magnificent ram my strong-greaved companions allotted
only to me when the livestock was shared, as a special possession.