Lots chose exactly the men I myself would have wanted beside me,
four men chosen, and I placed myself in the group as the fifth man.

He came back in the evening and shepherded beautiful-fleeced sheep,
driving the whole of his fat-lying flock to the depth of the cavern,
every animal, leaving not one in the deep-sided courtyard,
whether some knowledge possessed him, or god had commanded the action.

Then he lifted on high and positioned the giant rock for the doorway;

sitting thereafter, he milked every ewe and the bleating she-goats,
all in appropriate order, and placed every young one beneath them.

Then, when he rapidly finished the whole of the work he was doing,
snatching up two at a time once again, he made ready his supper.

Then I drew close to the Cyclops and spoke, while I carried the ivy-
wood drinking bowl full of black-colored wine in my hands as an offering:

“Cyclops, drink now the wine, since on flesh of humanity you have
fed, so you learn the kind of the drink that our vessel was carrying.

This as a pouring I brought in the hope you might pity and send me
homeward;

instead, you are raging beyond any limit of outrage.

Pitiless creature, how ever again shall a man out of all the
many draw near you, since all you have done is beyond any measure?”
Thus did I speak;

he received it and drank, and the drink made him terribly
glad in its sweetness;

again he demanded a second full measure:

“Give me still more and be generous;

tell me the name you are called by,
here and at once, so I give you a gift that shall gladden your spirit.

Grain-giving plowland produces the wine for the men of Cyclopes,
excellent clusters, and rain sent by Zeus makes the grapes full and swollen;

this wine is truly a rivulet flowing with nectar and ambrosia.”
Thus did he speak, and again I provided the fire-bright wine there.

Three times I carried and gave it;

three times in his folly he drained it.

Then, when the wine had encircled the Cyclops’ thoughts and his reason,
sweetly as honey I spoke to the monster and offered an answer:

“Cyclops, you ask me the name I am gloriously called by;

then I shall
tell you, and you shall provide me the gift you have promised in welcome.

Nobody is my name, and Nobody everyone calls me,
mother and father alike and all of my other companions.”
Thus did I speak;

he responded at once with a pitiless spirit:

“Nobody I shall consume at the last, after all his companions,
eating the others before him;

and that is the gift I shall give you.”
Thus did he speak;

reeling backward, he fell, and he lay with his massive
neck bent over his shoulder;

and sleep, the subduer of all things,
seized him;

and out of his gullet the wine came streaming and gushing,
mingled with gobbets of human flesh as he drunkenly vomited.

Then in the thick ash I planted the stake to grow hot in the fire,
speaking to put a bold courage in all my companions around me,
lest any man should draw back from the work in his terror and weakness.

Then, when the olive stake in the fire, although it was green wood,
nearly had caught into flame and glowed terribly through its full measure,
out of the fire I brought it, while all my companions around me
stood;

and divinity breathed in our bodies a courage tremendous.

Taking the stake of the olive, sharpened to end in a point there,
into his eye they rammed it;

and I, putting weight from above it,
turned it around, like a man who is drilling a timber for shipwork,
while underneath him companions continually keep the drill running,
pulling a strap they hold at both ends, and it spins without ceasing.

So with the fire-pointed stake we took hold and revolved it
there in his eye, and the blood boiled out all around it from hotness;