rather they live on the crowns of the high and magnificent mountains,
dwelling in hollow caves, and every man gives the law there
over his children and wives, and they care not at all for each other.

Outside the harbor extends an island covered with scrubland,
neither beside the Cyclopes’ land nor a great way away from it,
forested, where an uncountable number of wild goats are breeding.

No human footstep disturbs them and scares them away in their grazing;

no hunters ever approach them, the men who must suffer great hardship
moving among the high forests and ranging the peaks of the mountains.

Neither do flocks hold the island nor fields that are furrowed by plowing;

unsown and unplowed it remains all the days of existence,
widowed of mortals, while only the bleating goats feed upon it.

No red-cheeked vessels are held by the men of the race of Cyclopes;

neither are shipwrights among them who might by their labor construct them
vessels with excellent benches to answer to every occasion,
traveling over the sea to the cities of all other people,
such as humanity often will cross in their vessels to visit.

Craftsmen like these would have made of the island a beautiful settlement;

it is not bad, but would bear every crop in its proper season.

Soft, well-watered meadows extend by the shores of the gray sea,
where growing vines would be found forever undying and fruitful;

level the plowland is there, where an excellent harvest would always
stand to be reaped in the season, for rich is the soil lying under.

There is a harbor with safety from storms, where no cables are needed,
neither the casting of anchor-stones nor the fastening of stern ropes;

there one may beach a ship and wait for the time when the sailors’
hearts move them onward and breezes arise to be carried behind them.

There at the head of the harbor a beautiful spring gives its water,
out of a cave, while black-colored poplars are growing around it.

There we came sailing, and some god guided our passage among them,
deep in the nighttime, while nothing ahead could be seen by our eyesight;

round all the vessels a dense mist lay, and the moon from the heavens
shed not a light, since the whole of its face was enclosed within cloudbanks.

No one among us perceived that the island was there with his eyesight,
neither perceived we the long-rolling waves that approached the dry shoreline,
not till the well-benched vessels had run themselves up on the beaches.

Then, when the ships had been beached, we took all of the sails from above them,
stepping ourselves to the surf-line there at the edge of the sea-way;

there we lay down to sleep and awaited the beautiful dawning.

When early Dawn had appeared with her beautiful rose-colored fingers,
then we explored all around the island and marveled in wonder.

Nymphs who were daughters of Zeus who possesses the aegis awakened
goats in the mountains, so all my companions might find them for supper.

Straightway we carried the curved bows out of the ships and the long spears
fitted with sockets, and then we arranged ourselves in three parties,
shooting the goats;

quickly the god gave the game that our hearts had desired.

Twelve ships traveled beside me, and there to every ship were
nine goats given by lot, while ten were selected as my share.

So then all day long till the sun and the light were descending,
there we sat feasting on meat past counting and sweet wine beside it.

Red-colored wine had not yet been spent from the holds of the vessels;

some still remained, since every crew had drawn off an abundance
into the two-handled jars when we captured the holy Cicone fortress.

There we looked out at the nearby country that held the Cyclopes,
seeing their smoke and hearing the voices of people and sheep-flocks.