and a fine name I would win among mankind
for goodness, now and ever after,
I who led you to my hut and gave you a guest's due,
if then I killed you and took the dear life out of you:

with a clean heart, after that, I could pray to Zeus the son of Cronos!

But it is supper time.

Soon now my companions
should be in, so we can make a savory supper in the hut."

So the two of them spoke such things to one another;
and the swine came near, and the men who herd them.
They shut the sows in their pens for the night's sleep,
and a clamor past speech went up as the swine were folded.
Then the noble swineherd called to his companions:
"Bring the best of the hogs, so I may slaughter it for a guest
from far away. And we will have some good of it ourselves,
who bear the misery of these white-tusked swine and suffer for it
so long, while others eat our labor and pay nothing."
So speaking, he split the firewood with the pitiless bronze,
and they brought in a hog, well fattened, five years old,
and stood it by the hearth. Nor did the swineherd
forget the deathless ones: for his mind was set on good.
No — beginning the rite, he cast into the fire the head-bristles
of the white-tusked hog, and prayed to all the gods
that wise Odysseus might come home to his own house.
Then he lifted an oak billet, left over from the splitting,
and struck: and the life left the hog; and the others cut the throat,
and singed it, and quickly quartered it out. And the swineherd,
beginning the offering, laid raw flesh from every limb
in the rich fat, and cast the pieces in the fire,
sprinkled over with barley meal; and they carved the rest
and threaded it on spits, and roasted it with care,
and drew it all off, and heaped it on the platters. And the swineherd
stood up to divide it: for his mind knew what was fair.
Into seven portions he divided the whole:
one he set aside, with a prayer, for the Nymphs and for Hermes,
Maia's son; the rest he served out to each man;
and Odysseus he honored with the long unbroken chine
of the white-tusked hog — and made his master's heart proud.
And Odysseus of the many designs lifted his voice and said:
"Eumaeus — may you be as dear to father Zeus
as you are to me: for you honor such a man as I am now with the best."
And you answered him, Eumaeus the swineherd:
"Eat, my god-touched guest, and take your pleasure in such things
as are here. The god will give one thing and let another go,
whatever his own heart wills: for he can do all things."
He spoke, and burned the first-cuts to the gods who are forever,
and poured the fire-bright wine, and set the cup in the hands
of Odysseus, sacker of cities; and sat down to his own portion.
And Mesaulius served them bread — a man the swineherd
had got for himself, alone, while his master was away,
without his mistress, without old Laertes:
he had bought him from the Taphians with goods of his own.
And their hands went out to the good things spread before them.
But when they had put away desire for food and drink,
Mesaulius took away the bread; and they, filled
full of bread and meat, bestirred themselves for bed.