But he went up from the harbor by a rough track
through wooded country, along the heights, where Athena
had shown him the noble swineherd — the man who cared
for his substance beyond all the house-slaves noble Odysseus had acquired.

He found him sitting in the fore-court, where his yard
was built up high, in a place with a clear view all around,
big and handsome, with a cleared run round it.

The swineherd
had built it himself for the swine of his absent master —
without his mistress, without old Laertes —
out of quarried stones, and coped it with wild pear;

and outside he had driven stakes the whole circuit, this way and that,
close-set and thick, split out of the black heart of the oak;

and inside the yard he had made twelve sties
hard by one another, bedding for the swine;

and in each one
fifty wallowing sows were penned,
breeding females.

The boars slept outside,
far fewer:

for the godlike suitors kept thinning them
at their feasts — the swineherd forever sending in
the best of all the fatted hogs;

and these numbered three hundred and sixty.

And beside them four dogs always slept — like wild beasts,
raised by the swineherd, a leader of men.

He himself was fitting sandals to his feet,
cutting them from a well-tanned oxhide.

The others
had gone their ways, this man here, that man there, with the herded swine —
three of them;

the fourth he had sent off to the city
to bring a hog to the overweening suitors — forced to it —
so they might slaughter it and glut their hearts with meat.

Suddenly the baying dogs caught sight of Odysseus:

they rushed him, yelping.

And Odysseus
sat down — pure craft — and the staff dropped from his hand.

There, at his own farm, he would have suffered shameful hurt,
but the swineherd came fast on his quick feet after them,
darting through the gateway — the hide flew from his hand —
and shouting he scattered the dogs this way and that
with a shower of stones.

And he addressed his master:

"Old man — the dogs came one breath short of tearing you
to pieces, and the shame of it would have poured on me.

And the gods have given me griefs enough besides, and groaning:

here I sit, mourning a godlike master,
and fatten hogs for other men
to eat, while he, perhaps, is starving for bread
and wanders the lands and towns of men of alien speech —
if indeed he lives still, and sees the light of the sun.

But follow me — into the hut, old man, so that you too,
when you have had your fill of bread and wine,
may say where you come from, and all the cares you have borne."
So speaking the noble swineherd led him to the hut,
brought him in and set him down:

he heaped springy brushwood
and spread on it the skin of a shaggy wild goat —
his own bedding, big and thick.

And Odysseus was glad
that he received him so, and spoke a word, and named him:

"May Zeus grant you, stranger, and the other deathless gods,
whatever you wish most — since you welcomed me with all your heart."
And you answered him, Eumaeus the swineherd:

"Stranger, it is not right for me — not though a worse man came —
to slight a stranger:

for from Zeus they come, all of them,
strangers and beggars;

and a gift, though small, is dear —
from such as we are:

for that is the way of slaves,
always afraid, when the masters who hold the power
are the young ones.

As for him — the gods have bound his homecoming,
the man who would have loved me devotedly, and given me possessions —
a house, a plot of land, a wife that many men had courted —
such things as a kind-hearted master gives his house-slave
who has labored hard for him, whose work a god makes prosper,
the way this work of mine prospers, at which I hold my post.

For that my master would have paid me richly, had he grown old here.

But he is dead.