— And I wish Helen's whole breed had gone down
on its knees to destruction, for she loosed the knees of many men:

he too went off for the sake of Agamemnon's honor
to Ilium of the fine horses, to fight the Trojans."
So speaking he quickly belted in his tunic with his sash
and went to the sties, where the tribes of young pigs were penned.

He took two out of there, and slaughtered them both,
singed them, cut them small, and threaded them on spits,
and when he had roasted all of it, he brought and set it by Odysseus
hot on the spits themselves, and dusted it with white barley,
and mixed honey-sweet wine in an ivy-wood bowl,
and sat down facing him, and pressed him on:

"Eat now, stranger — what house-slaves have to offer:

young pig.

The fatted hogs — the suitors eat those,
with no thought in their hearts of the gods' watching eye, no mercy.

Yet the blessed gods love no ruthless dealing:

they honor justice, and the right acts of men.

Why — even enemies, even raiders, who land
on a foreign coast, and Zeus grants them plunder,
and they fill their ships and set off home —
even on their hearts falls the strong fear of the watching eye.

But these men — these men know something;

they have heard some god's own voice
telling his grim death:

that is why they will not woo
in the right way, nor go home to their own, but at their ease
they devour the goods, high-handed, and spare nothing.

For every night and every day that comes from Zeus,
they slaughter victims — never one, and never only two —
and wine they draw off past all measure, and waste it.

For his livelihood was past speaking.

No hero anywhere
had so much — not on the dark mainland,
not on Ithaca itself;

no twenty men together
have wealth so great.

I will count it through for you:

twelve herds of cattle on the mainland;

as many flocks of sheep;

as many droves of pigs;

as many ranging herds of goats
in the care of foreigners and of his own herdsmen there.

And here, at the island's end, wide-ranging herds of goats
graze, eleven in all, with good men watching over them,
and every day each man of them drives up a beast for those others —
whichever of the fatted goats looks best;

and I keep guard over these sows, and protect them,
and choose out the best of the swine, and send it in."
So he spoke;

and Odysseus ate his meat and drank his wine,
ravenous, silent — planting evils for the suitors.

But when he had supped, and steadied his heart with food,
the swineherd filled the cup he drank from himself
brim-full of wine and gave it;

and he took it, glad at heart,
and lifting his voice he spoke winged words to him:

"Friend — who was the man who bought you with his goods,
the master rich and powerful as you describe?

You say he perished for the sake of Agamemnon's honor:

name him — I may know him, being such a one as he was.

For Zeus knows, I suppose, and the other deathless gods,
whether I have seen him and could bring you news.

I have wandered far."
Then the swineherd answered him, a leader of men:

"Old man — no wanderer coming with news of him
could persuade his wife now, or his dear son.

Drifters in need of keep — they lie
at random, and have no wish to speak the truth.

Every vagrant who finds his way to the land of Ithaca
goes to my mistress and babbles his deceits;

and she receives him kindly, and treats him well, and questions everything,
and as she grieves the tears come falling from her lids,
as is the right way of a wife whose husband dies far off.

You too, old man, would have a story stitched together fast enough
if someone would give you clothing — a cloak and a tunic.

But him — by now the dogs and the quick birds
have torn the skin from his bones, and the life has gone out of him;