Since I have come here burdened with wrath against many people,
both against men and against women throughout the grain-giving wide earth,
therefore let Odysseus be the name by which he is called now.

And for my part, whenever he comes to the vigor of manhood
and to Parnassus, the great house of his mother’s people,
there I will give him gifts and send him homeward rejoicing.”
For the sake of those things Odysseus came, to receive noble presents.

Then Autolycus himself and the sons of Autolycus round him
clasped his hands in welcome and greeted him with gentle sayings;

and Amphithea his grandmother, mother of his own mother,
folded Odysseus in her arms and kissed his head and both bright eyes there.

Then did Autolycus call to his glorious sons in the hall there,
bidding them furnish the feast;

and they listened and heard his urging.

Straightway then they led in a bull, a male in his fifth year.

This one they flayed and dressed, and they carved up all of his body,
skillfully jointed the meat, and ran the pieces through spits there,
roasted them well with care, and divided to each man his portion.

So then all through the day until the sun went down in the evening
they feasted, and no heart lacked anything of the equal banquet.

But when the sun went down and the darkness came on in the twilight,
then indeed they lay down and took for themselves sleep’s gift.

But when Dawn had appeared, the young one, rose-fingered Eos,
forth they went to the hunt, both the dogs and the men themselves also,
even the sons of Autolycus;

and noble Odysseus
went there among them.

They climbed the steep mountain all mantled
deep in forest, Parnassus, and quickly they reached windy foldings.

Then did the Sun strike fresh on the tilled fields of mortal men there,
rising from out of the deep-swirling stream of Ocean,
and they came to a glen, the beaters;

and before them the hounds there,
searching the tracks, went on;

and behind them followed in order
all of the sons of Autolycus;

and noble Odysseus
went with them close by the hounds, brandishing his long-shadowing spear.

There in a dense thicket a huge wild boar lay couched and hidden.

Into that place no force of the wet-blowing winds ever entered,
neither did shining Sun with his beams ever strike through upon it,
neither could rain pass through from one side straight on to the other,
so exceedingly dense it was, and leaves lay fallen there thickly.

Then there came round the boar the clatter of feet of the hunters,
both of men and of dogs, as they pressed on;

and out of the thicket
facing them rose he, his ridge-bristles lifting in terror,
fire in his eyes;

and he stood there very close to them.

First then
rushed in Odysseus, lifting on high in his stout hand the long spear,
eager to wound him;

but first the boar struck him in onset,
just above on the knee, and with slanting rush of his tusk there
tore away much flesh, but he did not reach to the bone of the hero.

Yet Odysseus struck him, hitting him square on the right shoulder,
and right through passed the point of the bright-shining spear in its fury.

Down in the dust he fell with a grunt, and the spirit flew from him.

Then did the dear sons of Autolycus busy themselves round him,
and the wound of Odysseus, the noble and godlike fighter,
they bound up well with skill, and with charm-song stanched the black blood there,
and swiftly then they came again to the house of their own dear father.

Then Autolycus himself and the sons of Autolycus round him,
after they healed him well and bestowed on him splendid presents,
sent him off in all haste, rejoicing, back to his own land,
unto Ithaca.

There his father and queenly mother
welcomed his homecoming gladly and asked him about every matter,
how he had gotten the scar;