But he said that he had gone to Dodona, there to listen
for the design of Zeus from the high-haired oak of the god there,
how he might come again to his own dear fatherland's country,
either openly now, or in secret, after so long a time absent.

Thus he is safe, and indeed he will come very soon now,
very near, no longer far from his friends and his fatherland's country;

yet even so upon this I will give you a solemn oath now.

Let Zeus now know it first, highest and best of the immortals,
and the hearth of noble Odysseus, to which I have now come here:

surely all these things will be brought to pass as I tell you.

Within this very circuit of time will Odysseus come hither,
as this month wanes away and the next one rises upon us.”
Then again thoughtful Penelope answered him, saying:

“Ah if only, stranger, this word might indeed be accomplished.

Then very soon you would know my friendship and many gifts from me,
so that whoever might meet you would call you blessed indeed there.

But in my heart I foresee it thus, and thus it shall happen:

neither will Odysseus come home, nor will you get an escort,
since there are no masters such as that in this household,
such as Odysseus was among men, if ever indeed he was one,
to receive honored strangers and send them on their journey.

But wash him now, handmaids, and prepare him a bedstead,
with bedding and cloaks and bright-glossed blankets upon it,
so that being warmly covered he may await Dawn's golden throne.

And at earliest morning bathe him and anoint him with olive oil,
so that indoors by Telemachus there he may mind his own supper,
seated within the great hall;

and more grievous for any among them,
whoever afflicts him with soul-destroying taunting and malice:

here he will get nothing done hereafter, however fiercely enraged he.

For how, my guest, will you learn whether I surpass the other women
in good sense and in the thoughtful counsel alive in my spirit,
if in my halls you feast there unwashed and clad in foul raiment?

Men are but creatures that flourish a little while only.

One who is harsh in himself and who harbors harsh understanding,
on him all mortals call down pains yet to come while he liveth,
while he lives, and when he is dead all men make mock of him after.

But if a man is blameless himself and knows what is blameless,
then strangers abroad bear wide the fame of that man among all men,
carrying it over mankind, and many declare he is noble.”
Then resourceful Odysseus answered her, saying in turn:

“Revered wife of Odysseus, son of Laertes, hear me:

truly to me cloaks now and shining blankets have grown hateful
from the time when I first left behind me the snowy hillsides of Crete,
setting forth in the long-oared ship on the course of my journey;

and I will lie down now as before through many unsleeping nighttimes.

For indeed many nights on an unlovely couch I have suffered,
lying awake and awaiting divine Dawn seated on her fair throne.

Nor at all does the washing of feet bring delight to my spirit,
neither shall any woman lay hold on this foot that is mine here,
none of the women who serve as attendants throughout your household,
unless there be some old woman, long-tried, who knoweth what is fitting,
one who has borne in her heart as many afflictions as I have;

such a woman I would not begrudge if she handled my feet here.”
Then thoughtful Penelope answered him, speaking in turn:

“Dear guest, never yet has a man of far-wandering strangers,
one so wise in discernment, come on to my house as a loved one,
for with such clear understanding you speak every word that is prudent.