Then from the hall came in the white-armed women attendants.

They took away much bread from the boards, and the tables as well there,
and the cups from which those overweening men had been drinking.

Then from the braziers they cast the fire down onto the hearth-floor,
and heaped much wood upon them afresh, for light and for warming.

Then Melantho upbraided Odysseus a second time, saying:

“Stranger, will you still even now annoy us all through the night here,
wandering round through the house, and spying upon all the women?

Out through the doors with you, wretch, and be glad for the meal you have eaten,
or soon enough you will go when struck with a blazing torchbrand.”
Then with a lowering look wise Odysseus answered and said to her:

“Strange woman, why do you set on me with a spirit so angered?

Is it because I am filthy, and wear poor clothes on my body,
and because I beg through the land?

For necessity drives me to do it.

Such indeed are the beggars and men who wander in sorrow.

I too once dwelt in a house among men in the old days,
blessed and wealthy, and often I gave to a vagrant who came there,
such as he might be, and whatever the need was that brought him.

Slaves I had beyond number, and many other possessions,
all by which men live well and are called prosperous and wealthy.

But Zeus son of Cronos destroyed it, since somehow it pleased him.

Therefore see to it, woman, lest you too lose all the splendor
by which now among all the maidservants you are distinguished;

lest at some time your mistress, angered, deal harshly against you,
or Odysseus return;

for still there remains some hope of him.

But if indeed he has perished that way and no homecoming waits him,
still by Apollo's favor his son is already such now,
Telemachus;

and no woman within these halls can escape him
doing some reckless wrong, since he is no longer so childish.”
So he spoke, and circumspect Penelope listened and heard him,
and she rebuked the handmaid and spoke out a word and addressed her:

“Certainly, shameless and bold one, bitch without fear, I perceive you
doing this great deed, which you will wipe from your own head surely.

For you knew everything well, since from my own mouth you had heard it,
how in my halls I intended to question the stranger
about my husband, since I am afflicted with careful grief for him.”
So she spoke, and then to the steward Eurynome said this:

“Eurynome, bring here a chair, and spread fleeces upon it,
so that the stranger may sit there and speak out his word and may hear me;

for I desire to question him closely and learn all about him.”
So she spoke, and the woman came quickly, eager in service,
brought a well-polished chair and threw on top of it fleeces;

then there sat down at last long-enduring noble Odysseus.

Then among them circumspect Penelope started speaking:

“Stranger, this first thing now I myself shall ask you directly:

who among men are you, and from where?

Where are city and parents?”
Then resourceful Odysseus in answer spoke thus before her:

“Lady, no mortal anywhere over the boundless earth could
find any fault with you;

for your fame reaches heaven's wide spaces,
like the fame of some blameless king, who in fear of the immortals
rules over many men, both numerous and mighty in valor,
and upholds justice;

and under him the black earth is yielding
wheat and barley, and the trees are heavy and loaded with fruit there;

the flocks bear steady increase, and the sea provides men with fishes
through his good government, and the people flourish beneath him.

Therefore ask me now in your halls of all the other matters,
but do not question my lineage and fatherland any further,
lest you fill my spirit still more full of painful afflictions
as I remember;