There is an old woman with me who has shrewdness stored in her spirit,
she who nursed that unhappy man well and cherished and reared him,
taking him in her hands when first his mother had borne him.

She shall wash your feet, though age has made her feeble and weakened.

But come now, arise, prudent Eurycleia, and hear me:

wash a man of your master’s own age;

for perhaps now Odysseus
has by this time such feet, and such hands, as belong to this stranger;

for in misfortune mortals grow old very quickly indeed.”
So then she spoke, and the old woman covered her face with her two hands,
and she shed warm tears, and uttered a mournful saying:

“Ah me, my child, I am helpless for you;

in truth Zeus above all men
hated you, though you held in your breast a god-fearing spirit.

For no other mortal ever burned for Zeus who delighteth in thunder
so many rich thigh-pieces, or offered such splendid hecatombs,
as you gave unto him, praying that you might come to a season
of sleek old age, and might rear your glorious son to manhood.

But now from you alone has he utterly taken the day of returning.

So, I suppose, women in foreign houses mocked also at that other,
women of far-off strangers, whenever he reached some glorious dwelling,
just as all these hounds here are mocking at you, every one of them.

Therefore avoiding the insult and many disgraceful affrontings
you did not let them wash you;

but me, not unwilling at all here,
the daughter of Icarius, prudent Penelope, has ordered.

Therefore your feet I shall wash, for Penelope’s sake and your own too,
and because for your sake my heart is stirred deep within me
by griefs.

But come now, attend to the word that now I shall tell you:

many much-suffering strangers indeed have arrived here before us,
yet never so far do I say I have looked on one so resembling
Odysseus in body and voice and feet as you now resemble him.”
Then resourceful Odysseus answered her, speaking in turn:

“Old woman, so say all those who have looked with their own eyes upon us,
both of us together, that we are exceedingly like one another,
even as you yourself in your careful thought have spoken and judged it.”
So then he spoke, and the old woman took up a beautiful basin,
that all-shining vessel wherein she washed feet, and she poured in
much cold water, and after that added the hot for the washing.

Meanwhile Odysseus sat down close by the hearth and quickly thereafter
turned himself toward the dark;

for straightway he thought in his spirit
she might feel and perceive the scar, and all would become manifest.

Then she came near and began to wash her lord, and at once she knew it,
knew the scar that a boar once gave him by striking with white tusk,
when he had gone to Parnassus to Autolycus and his sons there,
to the noble father of his own mother, who far surpassed all mortals
both in thievery and in the oath;

and a god himself gave these to him,
Hermes, since he would burn to him well-pleasing thigh-pieces of victims,
lambs and kids;

and the god went gladly beside him and helped him.

Once Autolycus came to the fertile land and the people of Ithaca,
and he found there the son newly born of his own dear daughter.

Then Eurycleia placed the child on the knees of his loved one,
when he had ceased from supper, and spoke a word and addressed him:

“Autolycus, you yourself must now find what name you will give him,
your own dear daughter’s child;

for he has been prayed for by many.”
Then in return Autolycus answered her, speaking this to her:

“Son-in-law dear and my daughter, then give him the name that I tell you.