for I am indeed most burdened with sorrows.

It is not fitting that I in another man's house should be sitting
weeping and mourning;

for grieving without cease is the worse thing.

Else some maidservant may take offense at me, or you as well may,
and may say that with wine I am making my mind swim in teardrops.”
Then circumspect Penelope in answer addressed him and told him:

“Stranger, indeed my beauty and form and comeliness wholly
were destroyed by the deathless gods when the Argives departed
sailing to Ilium, and with them went my husband Odysseus.

If only he might return and care for the life that is in me,
then would my fame be greater and thus would my beauty be fairer.

But now I am consumed with grief, for the god has driven so many
evils upon me.

For all the best men who hold sway in the islands,
both in Dulichium and in Same and wooded Zacynthus,
and those who inhabit clear-seen Ithaca here all around me,
woo me against my will, and they are devouring the household.

Therefore I give no thought to strangers and suppliants coming,
nor even to heralds, who are workers in service of the people;

rather, in longing for dear Odysseus I waste away inwardly.

They are urgent for marriage, while I keep twisting out cunning.

First of all for me a god breathed this design in my spirit:

having set up in my halls a great loom, to weave there a garment,
fine-spun and very wide;

and immediately I said to them:

“Young men, my suitors, since noble Odysseus has perished,
wait, though eager to marry me, until I finish this fabric,
lest the threads that I spin should perish and come to nothing utterly,
as a burial shroud for the hero Laertes, against the time when
deadly fate of destructive death shall at last overtake him;

lest some Achaean woman throughout the land should reproach me,
if a man of great wealth should lie there without any winding-sheet on.”
So I spoke, and their proud hearts in their breasts were persuaded.

Then by day I would weave at the great loom all through the daytime,
but by night I unraveled it, once I had set there the torches.

Thus for three years I escaped their notice and kept them persuaded;

but when the fourth year came and the seasons were passing upon us,
with the months wearing down and many long days completed,
then at last through my women, those bitches who cared for nothing,
they came upon me and caught me and chided me sharply with outcries.

So I completed it then, though unwillingly, under compulsion.

Now I can neither evade this marriage nor find some other
counsel;

and my own parents are urgently pressing me to wed him,
while my son is distressed at the men who consume all his livelihood,
knowing it now;

for already he is enough of a grown man
to care for his house, and to him Zeus grants honor and glory.

But even so, tell me your lineage, and from what place you come from;

for you are not sprung from the oak of old tale, nor from the rock.”
Then resourceful Odysseus made answer and spoke to her, saying:

“Revered wife of Odysseus, son of Laertes,
surely you will not cease from asking and probing my kindred?

Yet I will tell you indeed;

though truly you give me over
to sorrows more than I bear;

for this is the lot of a mortal,
when from the land of his fathers a man has long been absent,
wandering over the cities of men and suffering anguish.

Even so, I will tell what you ask me and press me to answer.

There is a certain land, Crete, in the midst of the wine-dark sea there,
fair and fertile, encircled by waters;

and men are within it
many, past all numbering, and there are ninety cities.

Tongue is mingled with tongue;

and among them are Achaeans,
and Eteocretans great-hearted, with Cydonian peoples beside them,
Dorians in their three tribes, and splendid Pelasgians.