and he told them the whole tale clearly,
how while hunting the boar had struck him with white tusk in onset,
when he had gone to Parnassus with sons of Autolycus.

That scar the old woman, taking his leg in the palms of her two hands,
knew as she touched it and felt it, and let the foot fall from her holding.

Then in the basin the shin fell down, and the bronze gave a clanging;

over the other side it tipped, and the water poured on the ground there.

Joy and anguish together seized all the thoughts in her bosom;

tears filled both of her eyes, and her vigorous voice was arrested.

Then she touched Odysseus beneath the chin and spoke out to him, saying:

“Surely you are Odysseus, dear child;

and I did not know you
before I had touched and handled my master all over, completely.”
So she spoke and cast her eyes toward Penelope, wishing
to make it known that her own dear husband was there in the hall now.

But she could not look straight back at her nor yet understand it;

for Athena had turned away the mind of Penelope from it.

Then Odysseus, feeling toward her throat, seized hold with his right hand,
With the other hand he drew her nearer and spoke out to her:

“Nurse, why are you willing to ruin me?

You yourself reared me
there at your own breast;

and now, after bearing much sorrow,
in the twentieth year I have come to the land of my fathers.

But since you have found me, and some god put it into your spirit,
keep still, lest any other man in the halls come to know it.

For thus I will tell you, and surely the thing will be finished:

if a god should subdue the proud suitors beneath my own hands here,
not even you, though you are my nurse, will I leave unpunished
when I kill the women, the serving-slaves, here in my hall.”
Then in reply spoke to him thoughtful Eurycleia:

“My child, what sort of word has escaped through the fence of your teeth there!

You know what manner of strength in me stands firm and unyielding;

I will endure like a stone, like iron that never is broken.

But another thing I will tell you;

now lay it away in your spirit:

if a god should subdue the proud suitors beneath your own hands here,
then I will tell you the women in hall, every one of them,
which ones dishonor you, and which are free from all guilt there.”
Then resourceful Odysseus answered and said in reply to her:

“Nurse, why do you speak of them?

There is no need for you to.

I myself will observe them well, and I will know every woman.

But keep this matter in silence, and leave the rest to the gods.”
So he spoke, and the old woman passed through the hall and departed,
going to bring the foot-water;

for all of the first had been spilled out.

But when she had washed him and anointed him richly with olive,
back again Odysseus pulled the chair somewhat nearer the fire,
warming himself, and he covered the scar with his tattered garments.

Then among them thoughtful Penelope started her speaking:

“Stranger, I myself will ask you one little thing more only.

For soon will come the hour of delightful rest and of slumber
for whatever man sweet sleep may take, though burdened with sorrow.

But to me some god has allotted grief beyond all measure.

In the daytime indeed I find relief in weeping and wailing,
looking to my own tasks and the tasks of the maids in the household.

But whenever night comes on and sleep has taken all others,
then I lie in my bed, and around my throbbing heart there
keen and crowded anxieties goadingly trouble me, mourning.