And another thing I will tell you;

do you lay it within your heart now:

I do not know if Odysseus wore these things when he left home,
or whether one of his comrades gave them aboard the swift vessel,
or perhaps some guest-friend gave them, since to many Odysseus
was beloved;

for few among all the Achaeans could match him.

I too gave him a bronze sword there and a twofold mantle,
handsome and sea-dark purple, and a tunic with tassels,
and with all due honor I sent him aboard his good benched vessel.

And indeed a herald, a little the elder than he was,
went with him too;

and I will tell you plainly what sort he was.

Rounded across the shoulders, dark of skin, and curly-headed,
Eurybates was his name;

and Odysseus honored him greatly
over the rest of his comrades, because he knew his mind truly.

So he spoke, and in her he aroused still greater desire for weeping,
when she had recognized all the signs Odysseus described surely.

But when at last she had had her fill of the tearful lamenting,
then in reply she addressed him and spoke these winged words:

“Now then, stranger, though earlier you stirred my pity deeply,
in my halls from this time onward you shall be dear and respected.

For I myself gave him these garments, the very ones you mention,
folding them out from the chamber, and fastened the shining brooch there
for him to be a delight;

but never again shall I greet him,
coming back to his home and his own dear fatherland's country.

By an evil fate in a hollow ship went great Odysseus
to look upon evil Ilios, not to be named among mortals.”
Then resourceful Odysseus in answer addressed her and said this:

“Revered wife of Laertes' son, of noble Odysseus,
do not now any longer consume your fair skin with your grieving,
neither melt your heart away as you mourn for your husband.

I blame you
not in the least;

for any woman laments for her husband,
lawfully wed, with whom in love she has borne her children,
even if he be less than Odysseus, whom they liken to godheads.

But now cease from your weeping, and listen closely to my story;

for I will tell you the truth exactly and will not deceive you:

I have already heard of Odysseus and his homecoming,
nearby, in the rich-settled land of the Thesprotian people,
living;

and he is bringing abundant and splendid possessions,
begging his way through the land.

Yet his trusty companions
he lost, and his shapely ship, on the wine-dark sea water,
coming away from the island Thrinacia;

for against him
Zeus and Helios were angered, because his companions killed cattle.

They all perished together in the loud-resounding sea-surge;

but as for him, on the keel of the ship the wave cast him shoreward,
onto the land of the Phaeacians, close akin to the immortals.

They from the heart gave him honor even as if to a god there,
and they gave him many possessions, and wished of themselves too
to convey him home unharmed.

And Odysseus long since
would have been here, but this seemed more gainful to his own spirit:

to gather wealth while passing over the face of much country.

So beyond all mortal men in the matter of profits and prudence
Odysseus knows many ways;

no other man could contend with him.

So to me spoke Pheidon, the king of the Thesprotian people;

and he swore this oath to me there, pouring libation at homeward:

that the ship had been hauled down and the comrades stood ready,
those who would send him away to his own dear fatherland's country.

But me he dispatched before him;

for there came there a vessel
of Thesprotian men, sailing to wheat-rich Dulichium.

And he showed me the treasure, all that Odysseus had gathered;

it would indeed maintain yet another man to the tenth generation,
so many lordly possessions were laid in the palace for him there.