As when Pandareus’ daughter, the nightingale green in the thicket,
sings out beautifully when spring is newly beginning,
sitting within the dense-leafed cover and foliage of trees there,
and often varying pours out her far-resounding song-notes,
mourning her child, beloved Itylus, whom once with the bronze blade
she killed in her witlessness, child of lord Zethus the ruler:

so also my own heart is divided and driven two ways here,
whether I stay by my son and guard all things in their order,
my possessions, my serving-women, and my high-roofed great dwelling,
honoring the marriage-bed of my husband and public opinion,
or at last follow with one of the Achaeans, whoever is finest,
one who courts me within these halls and brings me boundless bride-gifts.

While my son still was small, a mere child and childish in thinking,
he would not let me be wed and leave the house of my husband.

But now, when he is grown great and has come to manhood’s measure,
now he begs me again to go back from the house and depart from it,
angered over the livelihood that the Achaeans consume up.

But come now, hear this dream of mine and interpret it for me.

I have geese in my house, twenty of them, and they feed upon wheat
out of the water, and I take delight in watching them daily.

Then from the mountain there came a great eagle with hooked beak,
and he snapped all their necks and killed them, and they lay there
huddled in heaps through the halls, while he rose into bright upper ether.

Then I wept and wailed aloud, though indeed it was in a dream only;

and around me there gathered the fair-haired Achaean women,
while I lamented in pity because the eagle had killed my geese there.

But then he came back and sat on the jutting beam of the roof there,
and with the voice of a mortal he checked me and spoke out to me:

“Take courage, daughter of Icarius famous in far lands.

This is no dream, but a waking vision, a good one, accomplished.

The geese are the suitors, and I was before this the eagle,
but now I have come back again, and I am your own husband,
who upon all the suitors will bring an unsightly destruction.”
So he spoke, and the honey-sweet sleep released me and left me.

Looking about, I saw the geese there within the great hall-room,
pecking at wheat by the trough, where before they had always been feeding.”
Then resourceful Odysseus answered and said in reply to her:

“Lady, there is no way to interpret this dream by turning it
to some other meaning, since Odysseus himself has made plain to you
how it will be brought to fulfillment;

and ruin appears for the suitors,
all of them utterly;

not one will escape death and destruction.”
Then in reply spoke to him thoughtful Penelope:

“Stranger, dreams indeed are baffling things, and their sayings are tangled;

and not all things that they show find fulfillment among mortals.

For there are two gates, men say, for the insubstantial dream-shapes;

one pair is fashioned of horn, and the other is fashioned of ivory.

Those dreams, to be sure, that come by the way of sawn ivory,
these are deceptive and cheat us, bearing a message unfulfilled;

but the ones that come forth through the gates of polished horn there,
these bring truth to pass, whenever some mortal beholds them.

But as for me, I do not suppose that my terrible dream came
out from that place;

how welcome a thing it would be for my child and me.

Yet another thing I will tell you, and lay it away in your spirit:

now indeed there comes this dawn of evil name, which from the house
of Odysseus will sever me;

for now I shall set down a contest,
those axes which he in the hall of his house would set up in order,
all twelve of them, set in a row like timbers that prop up a vessel;