There among them is Knossos, a mighty city, where Minos
ruled for nine-year seasons, companion of great Zeus in counsel,
father of my own father, great-hearted Deucalion.

Deucalion begot me and lordly Idomeneus with me;

but he in the curved ships had gone on his way unto Ilion,
going with Atreus’ sons;

but my glorious name is Aethon,
younger by birth;

but he was the elder and better man by far.

There I saw Odysseus, and I gave him the gifts of a stranger;

for the might of the wind had brought him down into Crete there,
as he was making for Troy, blown off his course past Malea.

He brought his ship to a halt at Amnisos, where is the cavern
of Eileithyia, in difficult harbors, and barely escaped the storm-blasts.

Straightway he went up into the town and inquired for Idomeneus;

for he said that he was his cherished and honored guest-friend.

But for him it was then already the tenth or eleventh dawn there
since he had gone with the curved ships onward inside unto Ilion.

I took him then to my house and gave him generous welcome,
warmly cherishing him, since abundant stores were within it;

and for the rest, for the comrades who followed along beside him,
from the public stores I collected meal and the glowing wine there,
and cattle to sacrifice, so that their hearts might be satisfied.

There for twelve days’ space the noble Achaeans remained there;

for the great North Wind penned them in, nor would let them on dry land
even stand;

some hostile divinity had stirred it against them.

But on the thirteenth day the wind fell, and they launched on the seaway.”
So he spoke many falsehoods, making them all seem like truth there.

And as she listened, her tears kept flowing, her fair flesh was melting,
even as snow melts away on the peaks of the towering mountains,
snow that the East Wind has melted, when West Wind has heaped it upon them;

and as the snow is dissolving, the rivers are filled in their flowing:

so her beautiful cheeks were melting with tears as they poured there,
weeping for her own husband who sat there close beside her.

Odysseus
in his heart had pity to see his own wife in her weeping,
but his eyes in his head stood fixed as if they were horn or iron,
motionless there beneath his lids;

and in cunning he hid back his tear-drops.

But when she had fully her fill of tear-laden lamentation,
then once more she answered him, speaking aloud these words to him:

“Now, stranger, I think that I shall make trial of you in this matter,
whether in truth in your halls you received and gave welcome to my husband,
there with his godlike companions, as now you declare that you did.

Tell me what sort of garments he wore about his body,
and what manner of man he was, and the comrades who went on beside him.”
Then resourceful Odysseus made answer and spoke to her, saying:

“Lady, it is a hard thing, after so long an interval,
to tell it;

for this is already the twentieth year fully
since from that place he departed and left my own country behind him.

Yet even so, I will tell you as my heart pictures him inwardly.

Noble Odysseus wore a mantle of wool, sea-purple,
doubled;

and on it a brooch had been fashioned entirely of gold-work,
fitted with twin tubes for the pin;

and before it a wonder was wrought there:

in its forepaws a hound held a dappled fawn, and was gripping it,
while it writhed;

and all who beheld it kept marveling at it,
how, though made all of gold, the one gripped the fawn and was throttling it,
while the other, eager to flee, kept struggling hard with its forefeet.

I noticed too the tunic around his body, bright-shining,
like the skin that is over a dried-up onion in thinness;

so soft it was to the touch, and bright as the blaze of the sunlight.

Truly many women gazed upon him there and marveled.