The Odyssey — Book XVIII

The fight with Irus; the warning to Amphinomus; Penelope shines before the suitors.

Then there came a common beggar who begged through the city,
ranging through Ithaca town, and his greedy gut marked him,
ravenous always to eat and to drink without ceasing;
yet there was no strength in him, no force, though huge to look on.
Arnaeus was the name that his noble mother had given
him from his birth; but all the young men called him Irus,
since he would carry a message whenever one told him.
He came and began to drive Odysseus out of his own house,
and reviling him there he addressed him in winged words:
“Move from the doorway, old man, lest soon by the foot you be dragged off.
Do you not see that they all are winking and signaling to me,
telling me I should drag you? Yet even so I am ashamed to.
Up then, before our dispute and our hands come to fighting.”
Then with a lowering glance wise Odysseus answered him:
“Strange man, I do you no harm at all, nor say anything evil,
nor do I grudge your receiving, though much may be given you.
This threshold here will hold us both, and there is no reason
you should envy another man’s share; you seem but a wanderer
just as I am, and the gods are the givers of fortune.
Yet do not challenge me overmuch with your hands, lest you rouse me;
old though I am, I might smear your chest and your lips over
all with blood; and for me there would even be greater peace then
on the morrow, for I do not think you would come back here
ever again to the hall of Laertes’ son Odysseus.”
Then in his anger the vagabond Irus answered him:
“Oh for shame, how the glutton runs on with his rolling chatter,
like some old crone by her oven; I could devise him a harsh fate,
striking with both of my hands, and send all his teeth to the ground there,
out of his jaws, like the teeth of a sow that ravages cropland.
Gird yourself now, so all of these men may know us in battle.
How could you ever fight with a man who is younger than you?”
So the two of them there before the towering doors of the courtyard
stood on the polished threshold and faced one another in fury.
Then the holy strength of Antinous noticed the two men,
and he laughed out sweetly and spoke among all the suitors:
“Friends, no such thing as this has ever befallen before us,
such delight as the god has brought to this house for our pleasure.
Here are the stranger and Irus disputing together
to fight with their hands; come, let us bring them together quickly.”
So he spoke, and all of them sprang to their feet with laughter,
and they gathered around the two beggars dressed in vile rags.
Then among them Antinous spoke, son of Eupeithes:
“Hear me, proud suitors, so I may say what is in my thinking.
There at the fire lie paunches of goats, which for supper
we set down after filling with fat and with dark blood.
Whichever of these two men wins and proves the better fighter,
let him arise and choose for himself whichever he wishes.
Ever thereafter he shall dine in our company with feasting,
nor will we let any other beggar come in here asking.”
So spoke Antinous, and his saying was pleasing to all of them.
Then resourceful Odysseus spoke among them with crafty intention:
“Friends, there is no way for an older man to fight with a younger,
one who is crushed down by suffering; yet this accursed belly
urges me on, worker of evil, to yield to his blows and be mastered.
Come then, now swear to me all of you a binding oath here,
that no man, favoring Irus, will strike me a foul stroke
with his heavy hand and by force overpower me for his sake.”
So he spoke, and all of them swore as he had commanded.
But when they had sworn the oath and brought it wholly to completion,
then in his turn the holy strength of Telemachus answered:
“Stranger, if your heart prompts you and your proud spirit drives you
to beat this fellow off, then fear no one else of the Achaeans.
Whoever strikes you will have many to fight against after.
I am your host, and the kings give praise and approval,
Antinous and Eurymachus, men both sound in understanding.”
So he spoke, and all of them gave assent; then Odysseus
girded his rags about his loins, and his thighs were revealed there,
shapely and great, and his broad shoulders showed to their sight then,
with his chest and his sturdy arms; and Athena stood near him
and made the limbs more massive for the shepherd of the people.
Then all the suitors were struck with amazement beyond measure,
and thus would a man look over and say to another beside him:
“Soon Irus will have drawn on himself a ruin past bearing,
such is the thigh that the old man shows from beneath his tatters.”
So they spoke, and for Irus his heart was stirred into anguish.
Yet even so the attendants, by force, came up and girded him,
terrified as he was; and the flesh on his limbs shook about him.
But Antinous rebuked him, and spoke and addressed him by name:
“Now may you neither exist, you loud ox, nor ever have been born,
if you indeed are trembling and fear this man so dreadfully,
an old man, worn down by the wretched affliction upon him.
But I will tell you this, and indeed it shall be accomplished:
if this man defeats you and proves himself stronger than you are,
I will send you away to the mainland, set in a black ship,
to King Echetus, the bane and destroyer of all mortal people,
who with pitiless bronze will cut away your nose and your ears there,
and tear out your genitals, and give them raw for the dogs to divide.”
So he spoke, and the trembling seized on his limbs still more strongly.
Then they led him into the midst, and both of them lifted their hands up.
Then much-enduring noble Odysseus pondered deeply,
whether to strike him so that his life would leave him there as he fell down,
or else to deal him a lighter blow and stretch him there on the ground out.
As he considered, this course appeared to him more advantageous:
to strike him lightly, so the Achaeans would not perceive him.
Then when they had both raised guard, Irus struck at the right shoulder,
but he hit his neck beneath the ear, and the bones within it
he crushed inward; and instantly crimson blood came into his mouth there,
and he fell in the dust with a bleat, and he knocked his teeth together,
kicking the ground with his feet; and the proud and lordly suitors
lifted their hands and died of laughter; but then great Odysseus
dragged him out through the forecourt doorway, clutching his foot there,
till he came to the yard and the gates of the roofed colonnade there;
there he sat him down propped up by the fence of the courtyard,
and placed in his hand a staff, and speaking addressed him in winged words:
“Sit there now, and keep away the pigs and the dogs from here,
and do not you be the master of strangers and beggars any longer,
vile as you are, lest some greater evil and worse one befall you.”
So he spoke, and cast round his shoulders the ugly beggar's satchel,
thickly patched and worn, and a twisted cord was its shoulder-strap.
Then back to the threshold he went and sat himself down; they within doors
went back in, laughing with pleasure, and greeted him then with their speeches:
“May Zeus grant to you, stranger, and all the other immortals,
whatever you most desire, whatever is dearest unto your spirit,
since you have made that insatiable rover stop begging
through all the land; for soon we shall send him off to the mainland,
to King Echetus, the bane and destroyer of all mortal people.”
So they spoke, and noble Odysseus rejoiced in the omen of it.
Then Antinous set by his side a great goat's paunch for him,
full of fat and of blood; and then Amphinomus lifted
two loaves out of the basket and set them there down beside him,
and pledged him in a golden cup, and speaking addressed him:
“Health to you, father and stranger; may wealth be yours hereafter,
though now for the present you are held fast in many afflictions.”
Then resourceful Odysseus in answer spoke unto him thus:
“Amphinomus, indeed you seem to me to be very discerning;
so was the father you spring from, for I have heard his good glory,
Nisus of Dulichium, that he was noble and wealthy;
they say you were born from him, and you look like a thoughtful man too.
Therefore I will tell you this; take heed and listen unto me.
Nothing more helpless than man does the earth ever foster,
of all things whatsoever that breathe and move on the earth's surface.
For he says that never hereafter will evil come on him,
while the gods grant him excellence and vigor in his knees still;
but whenever at last the blessed gods bring grievous things on him,
even these he endures, unwilling, with a patient spirit.
For such is the mind of men who dwell upon the face of the earth here,
as is the day that the father of gods and of men brings upon them.
For I too once expected to be prosperous among men,
but I did many reckless deeds, yielding to force and to vigor,
trusting in my own father and trusting in my own brothers.
Therefore let not any man ever at all be lawless,
but in silence let him accept whatever gifts the gods grant him.
Such are the reckless designs that I see these suitors contriving,
wasting the substance away and dishonoring the lawful wife
of a man who, I say, will not be far from his friends and his fatherland
much longer, but is very near. Yet may some god lead you homeward,
and may you not encounter that man when he comes to his household,
whenever he returns again to the land of his own dear fathers.
For I do not think that without blood they will part from each other,
that man and the suitors, when once he comes under his roof-tree.”
So he spoke, and after a libation drank the honey-sweet wine there,
then placed the cup once more in the hands of the marshal of people.
But he went through the hall with his heart in sorrow and trouble,
nodding his head; for his spirit indeed was foreseeing destruction.
Yet not even so did he flee from fate; for Athena bound him
there to be overpowered by the hands and spear of Telemachus.
Back again then he went and sat on the chair he had left there.
Then into the mind of her put the gray-eyed goddess Athena,
into the mind of Icarius' daughter, wise Penelope,
to appear before the suitors, so she might most fully expand
so she might swell the proud hearts of the suitors, and be held in honor
more in the eyes of her husband and son than ever before then.
Then she laughed an empty laugh, and spoke a word and named her:
“Eurynome, my heart is longing, as never it longed before now,
to appear to the suitors, hateful though they are to me wholly;
and I would speak a word to my son, for that would be better:
he must not always consort with the arrogant-hearted suitors,
men who speak him fair to his face, but behind him imagine evil.”
Then again Eurynome the housekeeper answered and told her:
“Yes indeed, dear child, all this that you have said is well spoken.
Go now, and speak to your son, and do not conceal it from him there,
when you have washed your skin and anointed the cheeks of your face first.
Do not go with your countenance thus all befouled round about there
with tears, since it is worse to go on in unceasing grieving forever.
For now indeed your son is of such an age as you chiefly
prayed to the deathless gods that you might behold him bearded.”
Then resourceful Penelope answered her once again, saying:
“Eurynome, do not urge me to this, though kindly you mean it,
to wash my skin and to anoint myself with the oil of gladness.
For the gods who possess Olympus have ruined the beauty
that once was mine, from the day when he sailed in the hollow ships from me.
But bid Autonoe and Hippodameia to come here
and attend me, so they may stand beside me here in the chamber;
for I will not go among men all alone; I am ashamed to.”
So then she spoke, and the old woman went through the hall of the manor,
bearing the word to the women and urging them all to come to her.
Then the gray-eyed goddess Athena thought upon something further:
over the daughter of Icarius she poured a sweet slumber;
and she slept, reclining there, and all her limbs were loosened
there on the couch; and meanwhile the bright among goddesses gave her
deathless gifts, so the Achaeans might gaze on her there in wonder.
First with ambrosial unguent she cleansed her beautiful countenance,
such as well-garlanded Cythereia herself there
anoints herself with whenever she goes to the Graces’ desireful dancing.
And she made her seem taller and fuller to look upon also,
and she made her more white than ivory newly sawn and polished.
So having wrought all this, the bright among goddesses left there.
Then from the hall came the white-armed handmaids drawing near her,
making a stir as they came; and sweet sleep released her then also.
Then with her hands she wiped her cheeks, and speaking she said to them:
“Surely a very soft trance enfolded me round in my sorrow.
If only holy Artemis would grant me a death just as gentle
instantly now, so no longer lamenting down in my spirit
I might wear out my life while yearning after my dear husband,
every virtue of his, since he was preeminent among Achaeans.”
So saying, she came down from her upper chamber so silent,
not all alone; with her there followed also two of her handmaids.
But when she came to the suitors, that radiant queen among women,
she stood beside the pillar that held the strongly built roofing,
lifting the shining veil and holding it there by her cheeks with her hands;
and on either side a faithful handmaid stood beside her.
Then there on the spot their knees were unstrung, and their hearts were enchanted
with desire, and each one prayed that he might lie down by her bedside.
Then she addressed Telemachus, her own beloved son, saying:
“Telemachus, your mind is no longer steadfast, nor your thinking.
Being still but a child, you held more prudent thoughts in your spirit;
now, when at last you are grown and come to the measure of manhood,
so that some stranger who looked on your stature and beauty
might say you were born as the son of some prosperous great man,
now your mind and your thought are no longer sound as they should be.
What is this deed that has happened here in the halls of the manor?
You allowed that stranger to be so shamefully handled before you.
How now, if some stranger who sat in our house as a suppliant
should suffer thus from disastrous rough treatment and torment?
On you would shame and reproach among all men surely be fallen.”
Then wise Telemachus answered her openly, saying in turn:
“My mother, truly I do not resent you for being angry.
Yet I perceive in my heart and know every matter before me,
both the better and worse; but before this I was only a child still.
Yet I cannot in all things think everything through with good judgment;
for these men sitting beside me bewilder me, one after another,
plotting out evil; and there are no helpers who stand at my side here.
Yet the affair of the stranger and Irus did not turn out
by the suitors’ wish, for in strength that man was the better.
If only, Father Zeus and Athena and lord Apollo,
so in our halls these suitors might droop their heads in defeat now,
some in the court-yard lying, and some inside in the dwelling,
and the limbs of each one be loosed, as now for that Irus
sitting there at the court-yard gate he nods with his head there
and is like a drunken man, unable to stand on his feet firm.
nor can he stand upright on his feet, nor make his way homeward,
home by whatever road his returning lies, since his limbs have gone slack now.”
So in this way they spoke such words there one to another together.
Then with words Eurymachus answered prudent Penelope:
“Daughter of Icarius, wise-minded queen Penelope,
if all Achaean men through Jasonian Argos should see you,
even more suitors than these would feast in your halls from morning,
since you surpass all women by far in beauty and stature,
and in the good strong sense and understanding within you.”
Then in return to him prudent Penelope answered:
“Eurymachus, surely my worth and my beauty of figure
the immortals destroyed when the Argives embarked against Ilium,
and among them my husband Odysseus went sailing also.
If he came back again and took thought for the life that is mine here,
greater then would my glory be, and fairer also in this way.
But now I mourn, for the god has driven so many griefs on me.
Truly when he set out, leaving behind his fatherland country,
he took my right hand fast by the wrist and spoke these words to me:
“Wife, I do not suppose the well-greaved Achaeans
all will return from Troy to their homes unscathed and unharmed there.
For they say the Trojans themselves are warriors in battle,
both men who cast the spear and men who draw the bowstring,
and riders mounted upon swift-footed horses, who quickly
bring to decision the great contention of level war.
Therefore I do not know if some god will send me back homeward,
or if there within Troy I shall fall; but let all here be your care now.
Be mindful there in the halls of my father and also my mother,
just as now, or even more, while I am absent and far off.
But whenever at last you see our son with beard on his chin grown,
marry whatever man you desire, and leave your own household.”
So he spoke in that way, and now all these things are fulfilled here.
There shall come a night when hateful marriage will face me and find me,
ruined woman that I am, from whom Zeus has taken prosperity.
But this terrible grief now comes on my heart and my spirit:
this is not how in former times the suitors behaved ever.
Men who are eager to court some noble woman and daughter
of a rich man, and strive with one another to win her,
those men bring in their own cattle and their stout sheep for slaughter,
making a feast for the girl’s own friends, and they give splendid gifts too;
they do not eat up another man’s livelihood free and unpurchased.”
So she spoke, and much-enduring noble Odysseus rejoiced there,
because she drew gifts out from them while bewitching their spirits
with her gentle words, though her mind was intent on other things wholly.
Then again Antinous spoke to her, son of Eupeithes:
“Daughter of Icarius, wise-minded queen Penelope,
whatever Achaean here may desire to bring gifts to you,
take them; for it is not seemly to refuse what is given.
But we will not go off to our work, nor elsewhere at all, lady,
not before you marry that Achaean who proves the best of us.”
Thus spoke Antinous, and his saying was pleasing to all of them there.
Then each man sent out his herald to carry and fetch him a gift there.
For Antinous his man brought in a great and beautiful robe there,
richly embroidered; and upon it there were twelve brooches
all of pure gold, fitted close with well-curved clasps in order.
And for Eurymachus at once his man brought a cunning-wrought necklace,
golden, threaded with amber beads that shone like the sun there.
Then for Eurydamas two serving-men brought a pair of earrings,
triple-clustered like mulberries; and much grace flashed from them brightly.
Then out of the house of lord Peisander, Polyctor’s son there,
a henchman brought a necklet, a marvel most lovely to look on.
And then one after another Achaeans brought some fair gift there.
Then up to her upper chamber went that radiant queen among women,
and with her the serving-women bore the beautiful gifts there.
But the men turned then to the dance and the song of desire and delighting,
and took their pleasure, awaiting the coming of evening upon them.
And upon them, delighting themselves, came the black dusk of evening.
Straightway they set up three braziers there inside the great hall,
so they might give them light, and around them they placed splintered firewood,
dry from long before, well seasoned, newly split with the bronze blade,
and among it they mingled pine torches; and turn upon turn then
the slave-women of long-enduring Odysseus kept them burning.
Then to the women himself spoke resourceful Odysseus:
“Slave-women of Odysseus, your lord long absent and far off,
go to the chamber where our reverend queen has her dwelling;
sit there beside her and twist the distaff, and cheer her spirit,
sitting within her room, or card out the wool with your own hands.
I for my part will furnish light for all of these men here present.
Even if they should choose to wait for Dawn on her fair throne rising,
still they shall not wear me down; for I am most patient in hardship.”
So he spoke, and they laughed aloud, glancing at one another.
Then fair-cheeked Melantho upbraided him harshly and shamelessly,
she whom Dolios fathered, but noble Penelope reared her,
cherishing her as a child, and gave her playthings to please her.
Yet for all that she never took Penelope's sorrow to heart, no,
but with Eurymachus lay, and loved him well as a lover.
She now addressed Odysseus with scornful and taunting reproaches:
“Wretched stranger, surely your wits have been wholly bewildered.
You will not go and sleep in the smithy after entering,
nor perhaps in some common shelter, but here you are talking
boldly among all these men in your overconfident spirit,
and there is no fear in your heart. Is wine now mastering
all of your mind, or is your thinking always thus foolish,
babbling empty words? Are you lightheaded now because lately
you defeated Irus, that vagabond beggar? Take care lest another,
better than Irus, quickly arise, who with powerful fists there
striking about your head may drive you blood-spattered from the house out.”
Then with a dark glance under his brows wise Odysseus answered:
“Soon I will tell Telemachus, bitch, what things you are saying,
going to him there, so that he may hack you limb from limb instantly.”
Thus he spoke, and with words he scattered the women in terror.
Off through the hall they went, and the limbs of each one were loosened
by their fear, for they thought that in truth he had spoken in earnest.
But he stood by the blazing torches that flared up in brightness,
watching them all; and within him his heart was pondering other
things in his inmost mind, and those were not left unaccomplished.
Yet Athena did not at all let the haughty suitors refrain from
hurtful abuse that cuts to the heart, so that still more sharply
grief might sink in the heart of Odysseus, son of Laertes.
Then among them Eurymachus, Polybus' son, began speaking,
mocking Odysseus, and stirred up laughter among his companions:
“Hear me, suitors who seek the hand of our far-famed lady,
so I may say what the heart in my breast is bidding me utter.
Not without god has this fellow come here to Odysseus' household.
Yet to my mind the bright gleam of the torches is shining
straight from his head, since there is no hair there, not even the faintest.”
So he spoke, and then he addressed city-sacking Odysseus:
“Stranger, would you be willing to work for hire, if I took you
out to the edge of my fields? Your wages will surely suffice there.
You could gather stones for the fences and plant the tall trees there.
There I would furnish you bread in abundance all through the year round,
clothe you with garments to wear, and give shoes to bind on your feet too.
But since now you have learned such evil ways, you will not be willing
to go about doing work, but prefer to skulk through the city,
begging, so you may provide for your insatiable belly.”
Then with a ready reply resourceful Odysseus answered:
“Eurymachus, if only a contest in labor might come now
between us two in the season of spring, when the days become longer,
out in the grassland, where I should hold in my hands a well-curved scythe,
and you should hold one as well, so we might make trial of labor,
fasting until deep dusk, with the grass still lying before us;
or if there should be oxen to drive, and they were the very best kind,
tawny and large, both full-fed on grass and both in their prime there,
equal in age and in pull, and their strength not slight nor exhausted,
and there should be four-acre tilth, with the soil crumbling under
plowshare, then you would see whether I could draw a furrow straight through.
Or if again the son of Cronos should stir up a battle
somewhere today, and I had a shield and a pair of spears with me
and a helmet all bronze, close-fitted around both my temples,
then you would see me among the first men joined in the fighting,
nor would you mockingly speak of this belly of mine any longer.
But you are violently insolent, and your spirit is pitiless;
and somehow you imagine that you are mighty and powerful,
because you live among only a few, and they are not worthy.
But if Odysseus should come and return to his fatherland country,
then for you those doors, though indeed they are broad, all too quickly
would become narrow in flight through the forecourt out to the gateway.”
Thus he spoke, and Eurymachus felt even greater anger within him.
Then with a dark glance under his brows he addressed him and answered:
“Ah, miserable man, very soon I will bring you to ruin outright
for these words that you boldly proclaim among all of these people,
nor is there any fear in your heart. Is wine now mastering
all of your wits, or is your mind always this sort of foolish,
since you speak empty words? Are you giddy because you bested Irus?”
So he spoke, and seized up a stool; but noble Odysseus
crouched at the knees of Amphinomos, lord from Dulichion,
fearing Eurymachus; so he struck the cupbearer's right hand,
and the wine-jug clattered to earth with a booming sound as it fell there.
Groaning aloud, the man pitched on his back in the dust of the floor there.
Then all the suitors cried out through the shadowy halls in confusion,
and thus would one man speak, glancing across at another beside him:
“If only that stranger had perished in roaming somewhere on another shore
ere he came here; then he would not have stirred up so mighty an uproar.
Now we are wrangling over beggars, and never a pleasure in feasting
will there be from a noble banquet, since what is baser is winning.”
Then among them the hallowed strength of Telemachus answered and spoke out:
“Strange men, you are mad, and no longer conceal in your spirits
food that you ate and the drink that you drank; some god is arousing you.
Come then, feast well, and go lie down at home when the spirit commands you;
as for me, I am driving no man away from the house here.”
Thus he spoke, and they all bit hard on their lips in amazement,
marveling much at Telemachus, how boldly indeed he had spoken.
Then among them Amphinomus rose in assembly and answered,
glorious son of Nisus, descended from lordly Aretias:
“Friends, let no man then be angry because of a word that is righteous,
answering back with hostile speech and with bitter contention.
Do not buffet the stranger about, nor any other servant
dwelling here in the halls of godlike Odysseus our master.
Come, let the wine-pourer begin with the cups and the first-poured libation,
so that, after pouring, we may lie down and go to our houses.
As for the stranger, let us leave him here in the halls of Odysseus
for Telemachus to care for, since to his dear house he has come here.”
Thus he spoke, and the speech that he uttered was pleasing to all them.
Then the hero Moulius mixed in the bowl for the company gathered,
herald from Dulichium, and servant he was to Amphinomus.
Then he served it to all men in order; and they to the gods there
poured to the blessed immortals, then drank the honey-sweet wine up.
But when they had poured and had drunk as much as the heart had desired there,
then they went to go lie down, each man to his own house returning.
