The Odyssey — Book XIII

The sending home; the ship turned to stone; Athena and Odysseus on Ithaca.

So he had spoken, and all of them then fell hushed into silence,
held by the spell through the halls in the depth of the shadowy megaron.
Then in his turn Alcinous answered him back and addressed him:
“Lord Odysseus, since you have come to my bronze-floored dwelling,
high-roofed hall, I do not think that after your roaming
you will be driven away from your homecoming, though you have suffered.
But to each man here among you I speak and enjoin you:
all who are always drinking in my halls the bright elder's
fiery wine, and listening there to the song of the singer:
Clothing already lies for the guest in the polished coffer,
and wrought gold, finely fashioned, and all the other gifts too,
all that the Phaeacian counselors brought and bestowed here.
Come then, let us also give him a great tripod and cauldron,
man by man; and afterward we, by collecting among the people,
shall make repayment; for hard it is for one man to give freely.”
So Alcinous spoke, and his saying gave pleasure to all of them.
Then they went away to sleep, each one to his own house.
But when Dawn early-born appeared with her rose-red fingers,
they hurried down to the ship, bearing the bronze that brings honor.
And the holy strength of Alcinous stowed it all rightly,
himself going through the ship under the thwarts, lest any object
hinder the crewmen at rowing whenever they strained at the oar-blades.
Then they went to Alcinous' house and made ready the banquet.
For them the holy strength of Alcinous slaughtered an ox there
for Zeus son of Cronos, the dark-cloud lord who rules all.
Then after burning the thigh-pieces, they feasted on splendid abundance,
taking delight; and among them the godlike singer was chanting,
Demodocus, held in honor among the people. But then Odysseus
often turned his head toward the sun in its blaze and brilliance,
eager that it might set; for indeed he was yearning for homeward.
As when a man longs greatly for supper, one whose yoked oxen
all through the day have dragged the jointed plow through the fallow,
welcome indeed to him is the light of the sun when it sets there,
so he may go to his supper, though his knees grow weak in the going:
so to Odysseus welcome the light of the sun sank beneath him.
Straightway he spoke among the Phaeacians who love the oar-stroke,
and chiefly addressing Alcinous spoke forth his saying:
“Lord Alcinous, most illustrious among all peoples,
pour the libation and send me away unharmed; and farewell, all.
For now all things have been brought to pass that my dear heart desired:
convoy and loving gifts; may the gods of the sky in their favor
make them bring blessing; and may I find my blameless wife in my home there,
come back again, with my dear ones safe and unharmed beside me.
And may you, staying here, give joy to your wedded wives there
and to your children; and may the gods grant every excellence,
every good thing, and let no public evil come on your people.”
So he had spoken, and all gave assent and urged one another
to send the stranger away, since indeed he had spoken with justice.
Then to the herald the strength of Alcinous spoke and commanded:
“Pontonous, mix in the bowl and serve out the wine through the hall now
to all, so after prayer to father Zeus we may send off
this guest to the land of his fathers, his own native country.”
So he spoke, and Pontonous mixed the honey-sweet wine in the krater,
and served it to all in due order; and they to the blessed gods
poured out libations, the gods who possess the wide heaven,
there from their seats. But lordly Odysseus arose then,
and into Arete's hand he placed the double-handled goblet,
and speaking aloud he addressed her with winged words and saluted:
“Farewell, my queen, continually, until old age comes upon you
and death, the things that stand over all mortal human creatures.
But I am going home; may you take delight in this household,
in your children and people, and in Alcinous the king there.”
Having spoken thus, noble Odysseus stepped over the threshold.
And with him the strength of Alcinous sent forth the herald
to guide him on to the swift ship and down to the shore of the sea there.
And then Arete sent attendant women to go there beside him:
one of them bearing a mantle well washed and a tunic,
and another she told to convey the close-fitted coffer with them;
and the third one carried provisions, both bread and ruddy wine there.
But when they had come to the ship and the water of ocean,
then the proud escorts quickly received all these things in the vessel,
and set them away in the hollow ship, all the food and the drink there.
Then for Odysseus they spread out a cloak and a linen cover
on the deck-planks of the hollow ship, so that there he might slumber,
still without waking, at stern; and he too climbed aboard and lay down
silently, while they sat at the thole-pins each in his order,
and loosed the cable away from the pierced anchoring stone there.
And when they had leaned back, they kept threshing the sea with the oar-blades,
and over his eyelids sweet sleep descended and settled,
unbroken, sweetest of all, and nearest in likeness to death.
And as on a plain a team of four stallions, all males together,
all at once spring forward urged on by strokes of the whip-thong,
lifting themselves up high, and swiftly accomplish the roadway,
so then her stern kept lifting, while after her surged a great wave,
dark-purple, huge, of the loud-resounding and many-voiced seaway.
Yet she ran very steadily, firm and secure; not even a hawk there,
no, not a falcon, would keep pace with her, lightest of flyers.
So she, running swiftly, kept cleaving the swells of the sea there,
bearing a man whose counsels were like to the counsels of immortals,
who before had suffered indeed very many griefs in his spirit,
testing the wars of men and the grievous and wearisome billows,
but at that time he slept without stir, having forgotten his sorrows.
When that star had arisen, the brightest by far among all stars,
which beyond all others comes on as herald of Dawn the early-born,
then at that hour the seafaring ship was nearing the island.
There is a harbor of Phorcys, the old man, the ancient of ocean,
in the land of Ithaca; and in it two jutting headlands
stand there sheer, breaking away, and bend toward the mouth of the harbor;
these keep outside the great wave down, which the stormy winds raise there,
while within well-benched ships remain without any mooring,
once they have reached the measure and bounds of the anchoring station.
Now at the head of the harbor there stands a long-leafed olive,
and close beside it a lovely cave, dim and mist-filled,
sacred to nymphs whom people indeed call the Naiad maidens.
In it are mixing-bowls and jars with handles on both sides,
fashioned of stone; and there as well the bees store honey.
In it too are long looms of stone, where the nymphs are weaving
sea-purple cloths, a wonder and marvel for any to look on.
In it are springs ever flowing; and two doors belong to it also.
One turns toward the North Wind, and men may descend by that entry,
but the other faces the South, and is more divine; by that pathway
men do not enter at all, for it is the road of immortals.
There then they brought her inside, for they knew the place from olden time; and
she ran onto shore as far as the half of her whole length,
hurrying strongly; for such was the drive from the hands of the rowers.
Then from the well-benched ship they stepped out onto the mainland,
and first from the hollow ship they lifted Odysseus,
with the linen sheet itself and the shining and bright coverlet on him,
and they set him down on the sand, overpowered still by slumber.
Then they lifted the goods that the splendid Phaeacian people
gave him to bear on his journey home, through great-hearted Athena.
These they then set all heaped by the base and trunk of the olive,
out of the road, lest one of the wayfaring race of men passing
should, before Odysseus awakened, come up and despoil them.
Then they themselves again started back for home. Yet the Earth-Shaker
had not forgotten the threats that he uttered against godlike Odysseus
in the beginning, but asked what the purpose of Zeus might be.
“Father Zeus, no longer shall I be honored among the immortals,
if mortals now do not honor me, not even a little,
these Phaeacians, who after all are sprung from my own generation.
For indeed I had thought that Odysseus, after much suffering,
would come home; yet I never wholly denied him his homecoming,
since you first had promised and nodded your head in assent there.
But now while he slept in the swift ship, bearing him over the waters,
they laid him down in Ithaca, and they gave him uncounted gifts too,
bronze and gold in abundance, and woven garments as well there,
many, so many as never from Troy would Odysseus have taken,
even if safe he had come with his due allotted share of the plunder.”
Then Zeus the gatherer of clouds in answer addressed him:
“Oh my, Earth-Shaker, wide-ruling lord, what a word you have spoken.
The gods are not dishonoring you; and it would be a hard matter
to cast dishonor upon the eldest and best among all gods.
But if some man among mortals, relying on strength and on power,
does not honor you at all, why, vengeance is always before you.
Do as you please, whatever indeed is dear to your own spirit.”
Then Poseidon the Earth-Shaker answered him, saying:
“I would act on it straightway, dark-cloud lord, exactly as you say there;
yet I am always mindful of your own spirit and shrink from it.
Now then, I desire to smash that beautiful ship of the Phaeacians,
as she returns from her escort across the mist-covered seaway,
so that now at last they may stop and desist from convoying mortals;
and around their city I mean to cast a great mountain about them.”
Then Zeus the gatherer of clouds in answer addressed him:
“Dear one, this is the way that it seems to my own mind the best course:
when all the people are looking on from the city and watching
as she drives in, then make her a stone very near to the mainland,
like to a swift ship in form, so all human beings may wonder,
and around their city cast up a great mountain about them.”
So when Poseidon the Earth-Shaker had heard what was spoken,
off he went on his way to Scheria, where the Phaeacians were dwelling.
There he remained; and the sea-faring ship came on very near him,
swiftly impelled; and the Earth-Shaker came up close beside her,
who made her a stone and rooted her fast in the seabed
driving her down with the flat of his hand; then he departed.
Then to each other they spoke out their winged words in wonder,
the Phaeacians, long-oared men renowned for the fame of their shipping.
Thus would a man speak out as he looked at the man close beside him:
“Oh, who has shackled our swift ship here on the open water,
driving for home? And plainly before us her whole hull was showing.”
So would one speak; but they did not know how this thing had happened.
Then Alcinous spoke in assembly and answered among them:
“Ah me, now truly the ancient prediction has reached and fulfilled me,
told by my father, who said that Poseidon would bear us resentment
because we convoy all men and send them unharmed on their journeys.
He said that someday a beautiful ship of Phaeacian sailors,
coming back from escort upon the mist-covered waters,
would be broken in pieces, and round our city a great hill be heaped up.
So the old man declared, and now all these things are accomplished.
Come then, let us all obey as I now shall instruct you:
cease from escorting mortal men whenever one reaches
here to our city; and let us sacrifice bulls to Poseidon,
twelve that are chosen, in hope that perhaps he may pity
and not heap round our city the long overshadowing mountain.”
So he spoke, and they feared, and they made the bulls ready before him.
Thus they were praying then to Poseidon the lord and the ruler,
leaders and counselors there of the people of the Phaeacians,
standing around the altar. But noble Odysseus awakened,
sleeping in his own fatherland, yet he did not know it,
having been long away; for a goddess had poured all around him
mist, Pallas Athena, the daughter of Zeus, so that she might
make him unknown, and might tell him the whole of the matter,
lest his wife should know him before, and his townsmen and dear friends,
before the suitors had paid for the whole of their reckless transgression.
Therefore to him as their lord all things appeared in strange fashion:
the long-stretching paths and the havens that welcome all shipping,
and the sheer-rising rocks and the flourishing trees heavy-leafing.
Then he sprang to his feet and stood and beheld his fatherland,
and after that groaned aloud and smote on the thighs with his two hands,
striking them flatwise, and uttered a word of lament in his sorrow:
“Oh, to what mortals’ land have I come now once more in my roaming?
Are they overbearing and savage and knowing no justice,
or are they friendly to strangers, with minds that revere the gods’ order?
Where shall I carry this wealth? And where shall I wander in person?
Would that I had remained there beside the Phaeacians themselves.
Then I might have approached some other exceedingly mighty
king, who would welcome me kindly and send me away to my homeland.
Now I do not know where to set these things down, nor indeed shall
I leave them here, lest somehow they become spoil for others.
Oh, for shame, then not wholly wise nor wholly just-hearted
were the leaders and counselors there of the people of Phaeacia,
who conveyed me away to another land, though they told me
they would bring me to bright-seen Ithaca, yet did not perform it.
May Zeus of suppliants repay them, who watches all mortals
and exacts retribution from any man whenever he sins there.
But come, let me count out these goods and look over them carefully,
lest as they went in the hollow ship they have taken some portion.”
So he spoke, and he counted the splendid tripods before him,
and the cauldrons, and gold, and the finely woven fair garments.
Of them nothing was lacking; yet still he lamented his homeland,
crawling along by the shore of the loud-resounding sea water,
grieving at length; and Athena came near him and stood by,
like in form to a young man, a shepherd and tender of sheepflocks,
delicate, such as the sons of kings in their youth are in beauty,
having around her shoulders a well-wrought cloak doubled over;
under her shining feet she had sandals, and held a light javelin.
Odysseus rejoiced when he saw her and went to confront her,
and calling aloud he addressed her with winged words in this manner:
“Friend, since you are the first one I have encountered in this region,
hail, and do not approach me with any intent that is harmful;
rather preserve these things and preserve me; for to you, like a god, I
pray, and I clasp your dear knees as a suppliant before you.
Tell me this truly as well, so that I may know it for certain:
what land is this, what people, and what men are native within it?
Is it some island clear in the sky, or else is it headland
sloping down to the sea from the rich-soiled face of the mainland?”
Then in return the gray-eyed goddess Athena addressed him:
“You are a simple man, O stranger, or else have come from far off,
if indeed you inquire about this land. It is not at all so
nameless as that; indeed there are very many who know it,
both all who dwell toward the dawn and the rising sun’s splendor,
and all who dwell on the farther side toward the mist-shrouded twilight.
Rugged indeed it is, and no land for the driving of horses,
yet not exceedingly poor, though in no way broad it is fashioned.
For within it grain beyond measure is grown, and within it is wine too,
and the rain is always upon it, and flourishing dewdrops.
It is good for the grazing of goats and the grazing of cattle; and woodland
of every kind is there, and springs that run through all seasons.
Therefore, stranger, the name of Ithaca reaches even to Troyland,
though they say it lies very far from the land of Achaea.”
So she spoke, and the much-enduring brilliant Odysseus rejoiced then,
glad in the land of his fathers, as Pallas Athena had told him,
daughter of Zeus who bears the aegis, the mighty protector.
Then he addressed her and spoke out winged words in answer;
yet he did not speak what was true, but held back the story,
ever revolving within his breast his profit-devising intelligence:
“I had heard of Ithaca even in spacious Crete-land,
far over the sea; and now I myself have come to it,
bringing these treasures with me, and I left as many behind there
for my children, and now I flee, since I killed the beloved son of
Idomeneus, Orsilochus swift of foot, who in spacious
Crete used to surpass all livelihood-winning men by his swiftness,
because he intended to rob me of all the plunder of Troyland,
plunder for which I endured many griefs in the depth of my spirit,
passing through wars among men and the grievous waves of the sea too,
because I was not willing to serve and oblige his father
there in the land of the Trojans, but commanded my own companions.
Him I struck as he came from the fields with my bronze-shod spear-point,
waiting in ambush near to the road with one of my comrades.
Very dark night possessed the sky, and no man among mortals
noticed us there, and unseen I stripped the life from within him.
But when at last I had killed him by means of the pitiless bronze blade,
straightway I went to a ship of the noble and stately Phoenicians,
and I entreated them, and I gave them heart-pleasing plunder.
I instructed them then to set me ashore at Pylos
or in holy Elis, where the Epeians hold their dominion.
But the force of the wind drove them away from that course after leaving,
greatly against their will, for they did not desire to deceive me.
Driven from there in our wandering, we came to this place in the nighttime.
Eagerly into the harbor we rowed, and none among us then
had any thought of supper, although we were longing to take it,
but simply disembarked from the ship and all of us lay there.
There upon me sweet sleep came over me, weary and spent with my labors,
while they took all my goods from the well-fashioned hollow ship’s hold
and laid them down where I myself on the sand had been sleeping.
Then they embarked and departed for Sidon, well-peopled and thriving,
while I was left behind there in sorrow, my heart full of anguish.”
So he spoke, and the goddess gray-eyed Athena smiled on him,
and she caressed him with her hand; and she seemed like a woman,
beautiful, tall, and skilled in the making of splendid hand-labors.
Then she addressed him and spoke out winged words in answer:
“He would be crafty indeed, and a thief beyond others, whoever
passed you in all your deceits, even if some god met you face to face there.
Reckless one, shifty-minded, insatiable schemer in falsehood,
not even here, in your own native land, were you likely to cease from
cheating tales and deceitful words, which are dear to you from the ground up.
But come, let us no longer speak of these things, for both of us know well
crafty advantage, since you are by far the best among mortals
in counsel and speech, while I among all the gods am distinguished
both for wisdom and cunning. Yet even so you did not know
Pallas Athena, daughter of Zeus, who always is standing
by you in all of your labors and guarding and keeping you safely,
and who made you beloved among all of the Phaeacian people.
Now once more I have come here, that I may weave plans with you wisely,
and may hide away the possessions the noble Phaeacians
gave you when you were coming back home by my counsel and purpose,
and may tell you as well how many griefs it is fated
you must endure in your well-built halls; and you must bear them by compulsion.
Tell no one of them, neither man nor woman, the story
that you have come here after wandering, but rather in silence
suffer your many pains, submitting yourself to the violence of men.”
Then resourceful Odysseus addressed her and answered her, saying:
“Difficult it is, goddess, for a mortal who meets you before him
to discern you, even though he is very knowing, for you take all likenesses.
Yet this I know full well, that in former times you were gentle
toward me, while we sons of the Achaeans kept warring in Troyland.
But after we sacked the steep-walled city of Priam,
and set out in our ships, and a god scattered the Achaean forces,
never again did I see you, daughter of Zeus, nor perceive you
boarding my ship so that you might ward some pain away from me.
No, but always with torn heart within my breast I kept wandering,
I kept on wandering, until the gods loosed me from my afflictions;
till on that day in the rich-settled land of the Phaeacian people
you gave me courage in speech and yourself led me to the city.
Now by your father I clasp your knees—for I do not imagine
that I have come to clear-seen Ithaca, no, but some other
land I am roaming in; and I think you are only in mockery
saying these things, so that you may beguile and bewilder my spirit—
tell me if truly indeed I have reached my beloved home-country.”
Then in answer to him spoke the goddess gray-eyed Athena:
“Always this sort of a mind is there inside of your bosom;
therefore I cannot abandon you there in your pain and your sorrow,
since you are gentle and keen of wit and steady in judgment.
Any other man, coming home from his wanderings, would be eager
straightway within his halls to behold his children and consort;
but to you it is not yet dear to be told or be certain,
not till you make trial still of your wife, who in equal constancy
sits there within your halls, and for her in continual sorrow
nights and days waste away as she sheds her tears without ceasing.
Yet for my part I never at all was doubtful, but in my spirit
knew you would come home again, though bereft of all your companions;
but I was not willing to fight with Poseidon against you,
my father's brother, who stored up wrath in the depth of his spirit,
angered because you had blinded the eye of the son he beloved.
But come, I will show you the seat of Ithaca, that you may trust me.
This is the harbor of Phorcys, the old man lord of the seaward;
and here at the head of the harbor stands the long-leafed olive;
and close beside it a lovely cave wrapped over in dimness,
sacred to nymphs, the ones that are called by men the Naiads.
This is the arching cavern where many and many a great gift
you used to perform for the nymphs, full-finished hecatombs there;
and this is Neriton mountain, clothed all over with forest.”
So the goddess spoke, and scattered the mist, and the country appeared clear.
Then did the great-enduring noble Odysseus feel gladness,
rejoicing in his own land, and he kissed the grain-giving earth there.
Straightway he prayed to the nymphs, lifting his hands up before them:
“Naiad nymphs, daughters of Zeus, I had never expected
ever to see you again; but now with gentle entreaties
hail, and we will give gifts, as we did in the time that is bygone,
if the daughter of Zeus, who drives the spoil, in her kindness will grant me
life for myself, and bring my beloved son on into manhood.”
Then to him once more spoke the goddess gray-eyed Athena:
“Take heart; do not let these matters trouble your mind any longer.
Rather, let us at once in the inmost part of the wondrous
cave put away these possessions, so all may remain safe for you there;
then let us both take counsel how everything best may be managed.”
So the goddess spoke, and entered the cave wrapped over in dimness,
seeking the hiding-places throughout the cavern; and then Odysseus
carried all inward close by, the gold and the tireless bronze there,
and the well-fashioned garments the Phaeacians had given him.
All these he carefully stored, and over the doorway a great stone
Pallas Athena set fast, the daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus.
Then the two of them sat by the foot of the sacred olive tree there
and were devising destruction for all the arrogant suitors.
First among them in speech began the goddess gray-eyed Athena:
“Son of Laertes, seed of Zeus, Odysseus of many devices,
plan how you shall lay hands on the shameless troop of the suitors,
who now for three full years have been lording it over your household,
courting your godlike wife and presenting the gifts of their wooing.
Yet she, with longing always in heart for your homeward returning,
gives hope to every man and promises each one in turn there,
sending messages forth, while the mind in her longs for another.”
Then in answer to her spoke Odysseus of many devices:
“Ah me, then surely I too like Agamemnon son of Atreus
should have met a disastrous doom in the midst of my halls and my household,
if you, goddess, had not recounted each thing in its due order.
Come then, weave me a stratagem, how I shall punish them for it;
and you yourself stand near me, and breathe bold force into my spirit,
as in the day when we loosed the shining frontlet of Troia.
If with such eagerness you would stand there beside me, gray-eyed one,
then with you I could fight against even three hundred fighters,
with you, revered goddess, if with ready heart you would aid me.”
Then in answer to him spoke the goddess gray-eyed Athena:
“Surely I will be beside you, and you will not fail to perceive me,
when the time comes that we must be busy about these endeavors;
and I think many a man of the suitors who raven your livelihood
will befoul the broad floor with blood and with brains all together.
But come, I will make you unknown to the sight of all mortals.
I will shrivel the beautiful flesh on the limbs of your supple body,
strip from your head the bright hair, and around you cast a poor garment
such that a man would abhor to behold it upon any wearer.
I will dim too your eyes that before were exceedingly lovely,
so that to all of the suitors you seem a thing of dishonor,
and to your wife and the son whom you left behind in your hall there.
You yourself first of all must go to the keeper of swine there,
he who attends on your pigs, yet in heart he is kindly toward you,
and he loves your son and prudent Penelope dearly.
You will find him seated beside the swine; and they pasture
there by the Raven Rock and beside the spring Arethusa,
eating acorns in plenty to strengthen the heart within them,
drinking dark water, the things that make the swine grow fat richly.
There you must stay, and sitting beside him ask about all things,
till I myself go to Sparta, the land of beautiful women,
there to summon Telemachus, your own dear son, Odysseus,
who to wide-spaced Lacedaemon went, to the side of Menelaus,
seeking report of your fame, whether anywhere you still lived.”
Then resourceful Odysseus answered and spoke in return to her:
“Why then did you not tell him, you who know all in your spirit?
Was it so he as well might wander and suffer afflictions
over the fruitless sea, while others devour his substance?”
Then in reply to him spoke the goddess gray-eyed Athena:
“Do not let concern for him lie too heavily on your spirit.
I myself was his escort, that there he might gather good glory
after his coming; he suffers no pain, but calmly and safely
sits in the house of the son of Atreus, with countless things by him.
True, the young men lie in wait for him there with a black ship,
eager to kill him before he reaches the land of his fathers.
Yet I do not think this will be; before that, the earth will enfold some
suitor men, more than one, who are eating away your substance.”
So then having spoken, Athena touched him there with her wand.
She shriveled the beautiful skin on the limbs of his supple body,
from his head she destroyed the fair hair, and around him a hide she
set on every limb like the skin of a worn and elderly old man.
She dimmed too the eyes that before had been exceedingly lovely,
and around him she cast another vile rag and a tunic,
tattered and foul with grime, all befouled by evil black smoke-stain.
Over him too she put the great hide of a swift-running deer there,
rubbed bare; and she gave him a staff and a pitiful beggar’s pouch too,
full of many rents, and the strap on it twisted with cordage.
So when the two had laid their design, they parted from each other;
then she went to glorious Lacedaemon after his son there.
