The Odyssey — Book XII

The Sirens; Scylla and Charybdis; the cattle of the Sun.

When our ship had departed at last from the stream of the Ocean,
entering out on the swell of the broad-roaded face of the sea there,
then we arrived at Aeaea, the island where early-born Dawn has
both her palace and dancing grounds and the sun has his rising.
There on the sand we beached our vessel and ran her ashoreward;
we ourselves disembarked on the line where the sea washed the shingle.
There we lay down and slept, awaiting the shining Aurora.
When early Dawn had appeared with her beautiful rose-colored fingers,
then I commanded companions to go to the palace of Circe,
bringing the body of comrade Elpenor, the man who had perished.
Swiftly we cut wooden billets, and there at the farthest-projecting
point of the headland we buried him, shedding our great tears in mourning.
When we had burned the dead man and all of the armor belonging to him,
we built the mound and dragged onto it a great pillar of stone there;
then on the very top of the mound we implanted his well-fashioned oar-blade.

Everything thus we attended. Our coming from Hades did not pass
Circe’s notice; at once she prepared herself, quickly approaching,
bringing along her maids, who carried an ample provision
both of the bread and the meat and the fire-bright wine in abundance.
Standing among us, she spoke as the radiant one among goddesses:
“Hardy men, you went living below to the house of the death-god,
dying two times, when the rest of mankind only dies a single time.
Come now, eat of your food and partake of the wine that is waiting,
here as the day travels onward. When Dawn shows herself tomorrow,
then you shall sail, and I shall point out your road and explain each
thing, so no ruinous scheme may destroy you and make you encounter
terrible grief in the sea or upon the dry land in your journey.”
Thus did she speak, and our proud hearts consented and yielded within us.
So through the whole of the day till the light of the sun had descended,
feasting we sat upon meat beyond counting and sweet wine beside it.
But when the sun went down and the sacred darkness had gathered,
all of the men lay down by the sternward cables to slumber.
She took hold of my hand and apart from the faithful companions
made me sit down, and she lay by my side and inquired of each detail;
I in its due and proper order recounted the whole tale.
Then lady Circe arose and addressed me with words of instruction:
“All these events have been brought to completion; now listen and hear me,
and an immortal himself will recall every word to your memory.
First you will come to the Sirens, whose music bewitches all people,
every human who travels the sea and arrives in their country.
Whoever approaches unwittingly there and gives ear to the Sirens’
voices will never again find his wife and his innocent children
standing beside him in joy when he comes to the house of his fathers.
No: the clear-toned song of the Sirens will hold and enchant him,
sitting at ease in their meadow, and round them a great heap of bones lies,
bones of the rotting men with their skins shriveling round them.
Drive the ship past; you must knead honey-sweet wax in your fingers,
stopping the ears of the faithful companions, lest any should hear them.
Yet you yourself may listen, if that is the thing you desire:
let them bind both your hands and your feet in the swift-moving vessel,
upright against the mast-step, with ends of the rope round the mast-tree,
so you may hear the voices of both Sirens and take your delight there.
If you entreat your companions and order the men to release you,
then let the men bind you down with a greater number of bonds there.
After your comrades have driven the vessel beyond them, I shall not
tell you completely from there which road you must choose of the two ways.
You must weigh every choice in the heart that is beating within you;
yet I will give an account of both, so that you can consider.
On the one side are the overhanging rocks, and against them
roars the tremendous swell of Amphitrite, the dark-eyed sea-queen;
all of the blessed immortals call these the Wandering Rocks there.
That way even the winged things cannot pass through, nor the timid
doves that bring ambrosia upward to father Zeus’s dwelling;
always the vertical rock takes one from the line as they pass it,
then the great Father sends one more bird, so their number remains full.
That way never has any man’s ship succeeded in passing;
pieces of ships and the bodies of men are together conveyed there,
carried away by the salt-water waves and the storms of destructive fire.
Only one sea-running vessel has ever gone safely between them,
Argo, renowned in the minds of all men, coming home from Aeetes;
even that vessel the wave would have hurled on the powerful rock face,
but lady Hera conveyed her beyond, for Jason was dear to the goddess.
On the other side there are two crags; one climbs into wide heaven,
ending in one sharp summit, and round it a dark-colored cloud bank
never withdraws, nor does clear air ever encircle the summit,
neither in summer’s season nor harvest’s ripening weather.
No mortal man could ascend it or set down a foot on the summit,
not if his hands were twenty in number, his feet were also twenty;
smoothly the rock face rises, as though it were polished completely.
There in the middle part of the crag is a cave filled with vapor,
facing toward the darkness of Erebus, and in its direction
you must steer the hollow vessel, O shining and noble Odysseus.
Even a powerful archer who shot from a hollow black vessel
could not cast the arrow as high as the vaulted cavern above him.
Scylla inhabits the cave, and she makes a horrible yelping.
Truly her voice is no greater than that of a newly born puppy,
yet she herself is an evil monster; nobody can see her
ever with joy, not even a god should an immortal meet her.
Twelve are the feet that she has, and each one dangles beneath her;
six are the necks she possesses, immensely long, and on each neck
sits one hideous head, and the teeth stand in three crowded rows there,
crowded and thick, and containing the blackest destruction within them.
Up to her middle she stands in the hollow cave that encloses
her, but the heads are extended outside of the terrible chasm;
there she is fishing, her ravenous hunger exploring the crag face,
hunting for dogfish and dolphins and any enormous sea-creature
she may catch from the thousands loud Amphitrite is feeding.
No seafaring sailors can boast they escaped from beside her
wholly unharmed in their ship, since every head of the monster
carries away one man who is snatched from the dark-blue-prowed vessel.
Lower in height is the other crag; you will see it, Odysseus,
close to the first, at a distance a bowshot can easily travel.
There is a great fig tree upon it, abundantly leafy;
under it shining Charybdis swallows the dark-colored water.
Three times a day she spits it, and three times terribly swallows.
May you not come to the place at the time she is swallowing water;
no one could rescue you then, not even the shaker of earth-land.
No, draw as close as you can to the crag where Scylla is living,
quickly drive past in your vessel; for it is exceedingly better
six of the men in your vessel should die than your whole band together.”
Thus did she speak, and I answered the goddess and said in response then:
“Goddess, come tell me this other, and speak with the truth as I ask you:
might I in any way slip from below death-dealing Charybdis,
then stand off Scylla and fight when she comes for my faithful companions?”
Thus did I speak, and at once the radiant goddess responded:
“Hardy man, your heart even now is concerned with the works of the war-god,
also with struggle. Will you not yield to the deathless immortals?
Scylla is no mortal creature, but evil immortal,
terrible, grim and savage, a thing that can never be battled.
There is no defense; in fleeing from her lies the greatest of courage.
If by the crag you remain for a moment to put on your armor,
then, as I fear, she may dart once again from the cave and attack you,
seize with all six heads and carry six more of your men there.
Row with all strength you possess, and invoke the divine Crataeis,
mother of Scylla, who bore her to serve as a plague upon mortals;
she will restrain her from darting a second time to attack you.
Then you will reach Thrinacia’s island, and there in abundance
graze Helios’ cattle with all of his strong-fleeced sheep-flocks,
seven herds of the cattle and also as many beautiful sheep-flocks,
fifty in each; they produce no young and are never diminished.
Goddesses tend them as shepherds, the nymphs with beautiful tresses,
Lampetie together with lovely Phaethusa, daughters
born to the lord Hyperion’s Helios by shining Neaera.
She, when their honored mother had borne them and carefully reared them,
settled them far from her side on Thrinacia’s distant island,
there to preserve all the crook-horned cattle and sheep of their father.
If you leave these all unharmed and remember your difficult homeward
journey, you still may arrive upon Ithaca, suffering greatly.
But if you harm them, I prophesy utter destruction
both for your ship and companions; and even if you should escape it,
late will you come and in evil condition, with all comrades lost there.”
Thus did she speak; and at once came Dawn on her gold-glimmering throne-seat.
Then she proceeded away up the island, the radiant goddess;
I made my way to the ship and aroused my companions from slumber,
bidding them board in their turn and release every stern-fastened cable.
Swiftly they came on the ship and sat down by the tholes of the oarlocks;
sitting in order, they struck with the polished oars on the gray brine.
Circe behind our vessel, the dark-blue-prowed ship of the seaway,
sent us a following wind that filled out the sail, a companion
excellent, Circe of beautiful hair, dread goddess, humanly speaking.
Then, when we carefully tended the tackle throughout the black vessel,
taking our seats, we were borne on our way by the wind and the steersman.
Grieving at heart, I addressed the companions who sat in the vessel:
“Friends, it is not fitting that only one man or two men
know of the fates that the radiant goddess Circe revealed me;
therefore I speak, so that knowing them all we may either be dying,
or turn aside from the death and destruction and make our escape there.
First she commanded avoidance of marvelous Sirens, the beautiful
voices they have and the flowering meadow where both sit together.
Me she alone gave leave to be hearing their song, but you others
bind me in painful bonds, so I stay unmoving before you,
upright against the mast-step, with ends of the rope round the mast-tree.
If I entreat you and order the men to release me from bondage,
then you must bind me down with a greater number of bonds there.”
Everything thus I explained as I spoke to the faithful companions,
while the well-constructed ship kept running with speed on the water,
nearing the island of both Sirens, compelled by the fair wind.
Suddenly there the wind came to rest, and a breathless and perfect
calmness arose, for a god lulled all of the waves into slumber.
Then the companions arose and furled up the sails of the vessel,
stowed them away in the hollow ship, and sat down by the oar-blades,
whitening water around them with polished fir oars in their rowing.
I with the edge of the bronze cut pieces from one rounded wax cake,
small in their size, and I kneaded them all in my powerful fingers;
quickly the wax grew warm, compelled by the strength I exerted,
also the beam of the lord Hyperion’s Helios, sun-god.
Then, going man after man, I stopped both ears of my comrades.
They in the vessel bound both my hands and my feet there together,
upright against the mast-step, with ends of the rope round the mast-tree;
sitting in order, they struck with the polished oars on the gray brine.
When we had gone as far as the cry of a man can be carried,
swift in our course, our sea-running vessel did not pass unnoticed,
leaping beside their island; they raised the clear song of enchantment:
“Come, much-praised Odysseus, magnificent glory of Argos;
stay your ship here, so that you may hear both of our voices.
Never has any man rowed this way in his black ship
till from our lips he has heard the honey-sweet voice of our singing;
no, he takes his delight and proceeds on his way with more knowledge.
Well do we know every deed that throughout wide Troy the Achaeans
and all the Trojans endured and accomplished by will of immortals;
well do we know every thing that occurs on the nourishing earth-land.”
Thus did they sing as they sent from the meadow their beautiful voices;
then my heart longed terribly to hear, and I ordered the comrades
there to release me, signaling them with my eyebrows; but forward
they bent and rowed, and Perimedes arose with Eurylochus quickly,
binding me down with a greater number of bonds and constricting.
After they rowed far beyond them, and no longer there could we hear the
voices of both Sirens or sound of the beautiful singing,
swiftly my faithful companions removed every piece of the beeswax
I had used in stopping their ears, and released me from bondage.

But when the island was left out of sight, then immediately smoke I
saw, with a mighty wave, and a booming arose in the distance.
Terror possessed all the men; from their hands the oars went flying,
clattering down in the current, and there the vessel stopped moving,
since with their hands they no longer compelled the tapered oar-blades.
I made my way through the ship and encouraged the faithful companions,
standing beside every man and exhorting him gently in order:
“Friends, we are certainly not unacquainted with evils and hardships.
This is no greater an evil than when in his powerful cavern
Cyclops confined us by terrible force, and yet from the cave there,
aided by my great prowess and counsel and thoughtful perception,
all we escaped. Some day, I imagine, we shall remember this also.
Come now, every one of you do precisely the thing I command you.
You, at the benches remain, and strike on the deep-running sea-surf
strongly with all of your oar blades, in hope father Zeus may be willing
somehow to grant us escape from the doom of this present destruction.
You, master steersman, I give this command, and you store it within you,
since in your own hands you hold the steering oar of the hollow
ship: keep the vessel outside of that smoke and the surf of the water;
hold to the crag, lest before you perceive it she suddenly races
off to the opposite side and you throw all of us in the evil.”
Thus did I speak, and the men gave heed to the word I had spoken.
Yet of Scylla I did not tell, of that inescapable horror,
fearing that all my companions, becoming terrified, might abandon
oars and go packing themselves in the hold of the vessel together.
Then I forgot Circe’s difficult order, that I should in no way
put on my armor and fight; I forgot every word that she told me.
Quickly I put on the armor that made me renowned and took two great
spears in my hands, and ascended the half-deck forward above them;
there I expected that she would be first to appear to my vision,
rock-dwelling Scylla, who brought the destruction upon my companions.
Nowhere could I perceive her, although both eyes became weary,
scanning each handbreadth of rock that was covered in dark-colored vapor.

So through the straits we proceeded in grief and lamentation,
Scylla upon the one side, and shining Charybdis upon the
other, in terrible swallows gulping the salt of the sea down.
When she vomited upward, resembling over a powerful fire there
some great cauldron, she boiled and seethed in her whole depth with churning;
high flew the foam till it fell on the summits of both mighty crag-tops.
Yet when she swallowed again the salt sea’s turbulent water,
all of her churning depths appeared open, and round her the crag face
terribly thundered, and blackened with sand earth showed at the bottom.
There the pale terror took my companions and broke every spirit.
While we looked toward Charybdis, afraid of our certain destruction,
Scylla snatched from the hollow vessel six men in one motion,
those most excellent there in the strength of their arms and their courage.
Turning my eyes to the swift-running vessel and looking for comrades,
I saw only their hands and their feet already above me,
swung in the air; and they cried and called on my name as she bore them,
one final time, and their hearts were filled with the greatest of anguish.
Just as a fisherman stands on a jutting crag with a long rod,
casting his bait as a snare in the sea for the small fish below him,
dropping the horn of a field-dwelling bull in the water before them,
then as he captures each fish he flings it ashore in its gasping,
so did they gasp as she lifted them upward toward the crag’s summit.
There in the mouth of her cavern she ate them alive as they shrieked out,
stretching their hands out toward me throughout the terrible struggle.
That was the most to be pitied sight my eyes ever witnessed,
all I encountered in searching the many roads of the sea-depths.

After escaping the rocks and the terrible maw of Charybdis,
Scylla as well, we came straightaway to the blameless and sacred
island of Helios’ godhood, and there were the beautiful broad-browed
cattle and numerous powerful sheep of the lord Hyperion.
While on the open sea and aboard the black vessel, I heard the
lowing of cattle returning to folds and the bleating of sheep-flocks.
Then in my heart I remembered the words of the prophet and seer-man,
blind Tiresias, Theban by birth, and the goddess of Aeaea,
Circe, who over and over commanded avoidance of Helios’
island, the land of the sun-god who brings such delight to the mortals.
Grieving at heart, I addressed the companions who sat in the vessel:
“Hear these words, my comrades, although you are suffering hardship,
so I may tell you the prophecies given by lord Tiresias,
also by Circe of Aeaea, who over and over commanded
shunning the island of Helios, bringer of joy to the mortals;
there she declared the most terrible evil is waiting to take us.
Drive the black vessel far from the isle, and continue beyond it.”
Thus did I speak, and their own hearts broke in their bodies completely.
Then did Eurylochus answer me straightaway with his hateful
language: “Hard is your heart, Odysseus; your strength is excessive;
none of your limbs ever tires. You surely are fashioned of iron,
since you refuse to allow your companions, exhausted from labor
and without sleep, to set foot on land, although on this sea-ringed
island at last we could make for ourselves an agreeable supper.
No: in this state you command us to journey through fast-falling darkness,
wandering out from the isle far away on the vaporous sea-roads.
Terrible winds are engendered from night for destroying the vessels;
how can a man escape from the sheer destruction if suddenly some great
storm of the wind should arise in its power and assault us, a violent
South Wind or hard-blowing West, which more than the others are smashing
vessels apart, even counter to will of the gods and their purpose?
No; for the present we all should yield to the blackness of nightfall,
making our supper prepared and remaining beside the swift vessel;
when Dawn appears, we shall board her again and sail onto wide sea.”
Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the other companions approved him.
Then I knew well an immortal was plotting an evil against us;
raising my voice, I addressed him, and these words took wing as I uttered:
“Lord Eurylochus, I am only one man, and you force me.
Come then, every one of you swear me a powerful oath here:
if we encounter a herd of the cattle or beautiful great flock
there of the sheep, let no one in terrible blind-minded folly
slaughter a sheep or a cow, but remain there quiet and feed on
all of the food that immortal Circe supplied for our journey.”
Thus did I speak, and at once they swore the strong oath as I ordered.
When they had sworn, and they brought their oath to a proper completion,
then we proceeded to moor the well-constructed ship in a hollow
harbor, beside a spring from which sweet-flowing water was rising.
All the companions went out on the shore and skillfully fashioned supper.
After we put away all desire for eating and drinking,
there they lamented, recalling the faithful companions whom Scylla
snatched from the hollow ship and devoured at the mouth of her cavern;
while they were weeping, a sleep of great depth came down and possessed them.
When in the third watch of night all the stars had gone past the meridian,
Zeus who assembles the clouds raised up an enraged wind upon us,
driving a howling squall, and he covered both sea and the dry land
under a cloud, and the darkness of night came down from the heavens.
When early Dawn had appeared with her beautiful rose-colored fingers,
then we dragged up the ship and secured her within a deep cavern,
there where the nymphs had beautiful seats and their dances assembled.
Then I called all my companions together and spoke and addressed them:
“Friends, there is food and there also is drink in the swift-running vessel;
therefore keep hands from the cattle, lest terrible harm come upon us.
These are the cattle and powerful sheep of a terrible godhead,
Helios, lord who sees all things and hears every utterance.”
Thus did I speak, and their proud hearts consented and yielded within them.
Then for an entire month the South Wind blew without ceasing;
never another wind rose but the East Wind and powerful South Wind.
While there remained any bread in the ship or the fire-colored red wine,
all kept their hands from the cattle because of desire for their lifebreath.
Yet when all of the food in the swift-running vessel was eaten,
need compelled them to wander abroad in pursuit of their quarry,
fishing and hunting for birds, whatever came into their dear hands,
using the curving hooks, while the hunger consumed every belly.
Then I proceeded away up the island, desiring to offer
prayers to the gods, in the hope one might show me a path to my homeland.
When, going over the island, I left my companions behind me,
then I washed both my hands in a shelter secure from the windstorm;
there I prayed to all of the gods who possess great Olympus,
but they poured down a sweetness of sleep on the lids of my eyes there.
Then did Eurylochus give his companions a ruinous counsel:
“Hear these words, my comrades, although you are suffering hardship.
Every manner of death is hateful to miserable mortals,
but to die from hunger and meet with one’s doom is most pitiful.
Come then, let us drive away for ourselves the best cattle of Helios,
sacrificing these to the deathless gods of the wide-ruling heavens.
If we arrive at Ithaca, land of our fathers, we straightway
shall build a splendid temple to lord Hyperion’s Helios,
setting inside many beautiful offerings, costly and precious.
But if in anger because of the straight-horned cattle he wills to
shatter our ship, and the other immortals consent to his purpose,
I would prefer with one gulp of the wave to surrender my lifebreath,
rather than slowly to starve on an island abandoned and empty.”
Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the other companions approved him.
Swiftly they drove the best of the cattle of Helios toward them,
grazing nearby, since not at a distance from our dark-blue-prowed
vessel the beautiful broad-browed cattle with curved horns were grazing.
Standing around the victims, they prayed to the gods, and they plucked there
tender young leaves from the crown of an oak tree that towered above them,
since no white barley remained in the well-benched vessel for worship.
After they prayed and had cut all the throats and had skinned the dead victims,
then they cut out the thigh bones and wrapped them with fat in abundance,
folding it double, and over the fat placed pieces of raw meat.
Since they had no wine to pour in libation on blazing oblations,
water they poured, and they roasted the inward parts over the fire.
After the thigh bones burned and they tasted the entrails together,
then they cut all that remained into pieces and threaded the spit-rods.
Then did the sleep of great depth fly off from the lids of my eyes there;
down to the swift-running ship and the shore of the sea I proceeded.
But as I came in my walking to where the curved vessel was waiting,
round me the sweet-smelling cloud of the fat’s smoke suddenly drifted.
Groaning aloud, I cried to the deathless gods in my sorrow:
“Father Zeus, and you other blessed gods who live forever,
for my destruction, it seems, you put me in pitiless slumber,
while my companions remained and devised this monstrous transgression.”
Swiftly the message was carried to lord Hyperion’s Helios;
long-robed Lampetie brought him the news we had slaughtered his cattle.
Then with his anger aroused he addressed the assembled immortals:
“Father Zeus, and you other blessed gods who live forever,
punish the faithful companions of lord Odysseus, Laertes’
son, for they wickedly slaughtered my cattle, the creatures I always
saw with delight as I climbed into heaven’s star-bearing region,
also whenever I turned from the heavens toward earth and its creatures.
If they do not pay me an equitable price for my cattle,
I shall descend into Hades and shine for the people departed.”
Then cloud-assembling Zeus the almighty responded in answer:
“Helios, shine as before for the deathless immortals above us,
also for mortals who live on the grain-giving fields of the earth-land.
As for the men you accuse, I shall soon strike their swift-moving vessel,
using my glittering thunderbolt, breaking it midmost on wine-dark sea-brine.”
This in the time afterward I heard from Calypso, the fair-haired;
she said she heard the story herself from the guide-god Hermes.

When I had come once again to the ship and the shore of the sea there,
going to every man, I rebuked them, but there was no remedy
anywhere we could discover; the cattle already were lifeless.
Soon the immortals began to display strange signs for the men there:
hides of the cattle crawled, and the meat on the spits gave a lowing,
both what was roasted and raw, and the voice came forth like the cattle’s.
Six days afterward all my faithful companions continued
feasting on Helios’ cattle they stole, the best in the herd there.
But when Zeus, son of Cronus, at last brought the seventh day to us,
only then did the wind desist from the raging strength of the squall-storm.
Swiftly we boarded the vessel and sailed on the broad face of sea-brine,
setting the mast upright and extending the glistening white sails.
After we left the island behind, and no other land there
anywhere showed, but the sea and the heavens extended before us,
then did the son born of Cronus establish a dark-colored cloud bank
over the hollow vessel; the sea turned black underneath it.
She did not run much longer; at once came the shrieking and storming
West Wind, fiercely assaulting the ship with a great howling squall-storm.
Both of the forestays snapped from the powerful blast of the tempest;
backward the mast fell, casting its tackle all into the bilge there.
There in the stern of the ship did the mast strike downward and crush the
head of the steersman, breaking the bones of the skull all together;
just like a diver he dropped from the deck of the vessel to water,
and from his bones immediately fled the proud spirit and lifebreath.
Zeus at the same time thundered and cast his bolt at the vessel;
all of the ship reeled round when struck by the bolt of the thunder-god,
filled with the sulfur’s stench, and the men fell out of the vessel.
Like the sea-crows they were carried around the black hull in the water,
borne on the waves, and the god denied their homeward return there.
Yet I kept moving throughout the ship, till the storm-surge
ripped both of her sides from the keel and a wave carried off the bare bottom,
snapping the mast from the keel; but round that mast had been tangled
still the backstay, a rope that was strongly fashioned of oxhide.
Using the rope, I lashed the two firmly together, mast and the keel-beam;
seated upon them, I drifted along with the terrible windstorms.

Then at last did the West Wind cease from its raging strength in the squall-storm;
quickly the South took its place, bringing pain to the heart that was in me,
since I would travel the same road back to death-dealing Charybdis.
All through the night I was carried, and there at the rising of sunlight
came to the crag of Scylla and terrible maw of Charybdis.
She at that time was swallowing down the salt water of sea-brine;
I swung up high toward the towering fig tree extending above her,
caught it and clung like a bat, for there was no place where I could
either secure both my feet or ascend and climb on the branches.
Far were the roots underneath, and the boughs were above me and distant,
long-growing branches that cast down a shadow on shining Charybdis.
There I clung without ceasing until she would vomit up toward me
mast and the keel once again; for my longing they came very slowly.
It was the hour when a man from the meeting arises for supper,
judge who had settled disputes of the young men contending before him;
then the two timbers appeared once again from within great Charybdis.
Down from above I let go with my hands and my feet there together,
falling with one mighty crash in the water beyond the long timbers;
seated on these, with my hands I rowed on the surface of sea-brine.
Scylla the father of mortals and gods never suffered to see me
there once again, for I could not have fled sheer death and destruction.
Nine days I drifted from there, and upon the tenth, in the darkness,
gods brought me near to Ogygia’s island, where lady Calypso
lives, the dread goddess, humanly speaking, with beautiful tresses;
she gave me love and attended me. Why should I tell you the tale twice?
Only yesterday here in this house I recounted the story,
both to yourself and your powerful wife; and it is hateful to me now,
telling a story again that was fully and plainly recounted.”
