The Odyssey — Book XXI

The bow: pedigree, contest, recruitment, and the stringing.

Then in her mind the goddess set it, gray-eyed Pallas Athena,
in Icarius’ daughter, wise-minded Penelope’s spirit,
to set before the suitors the bow and the pale gray iron
there in Odysseus’ hall, for the trial and first of the bloodshed.
Up she went on the high stairway of her own house climbing,
and in her thick strong hand she took the curved key of the chamber,
lovely, of bronze, and upon it an ivory handle was fitted.
Then she went to the storeroom attended by serving-women,
far in the back, where there for her lord the treasures were lying,
bronze and gold, and iron wrought through labor in plenty.
There lay the bow with its backward bend, and the quiver for arrows,
arrow-receiving; and many grief-giving shafts were within it,
gifts that a guest-friend gave him in Lacedaemon upon meeting,
Iphitus son of Eurytus, like to the deathless immortals.
These two had met one another in Messene country,
in the house of warlike Ortilochus; there Odysseus
came on a matter of debt, which the whole folk owed unto him;
for Messenian men had lifted from Ithaca sheep there,
three hundred, with shepherds besides, in their many-benched vessels.
For their sake over a very long road came godlike Odysseus,
still but a boy; for his father had sent him, and elders beside him.
Iphitus meanwhile was searching for horses, the mares that were missing,
twelve brood-mares, and beneath them hard-working mule-colts were suckling.
These were the mares that later became for him death and destruction,
when indeed he came to the mighty-hearted son of great Zeus,
to Heracles, man well skilled in the knowledge of splendid achievements,
who killed him, though he was a guest within his own dwelling,
ruthless man; he respected not gods’ overseeing, nor table,
that which he set before him, but after that slew him as well there,
and himself kept the strong-hoofed horses within his own hall there.
Asking of these, he encountered Odysseus and gave him the bow there,
which in former days great Eurytus bore; but he left it
to his son in his high-roofed house as he lay there dying.
Then Odysseus gave him a sharp sword and a powerful spear-shaft,
first beginning a guest-friend bond of affection between them;
yet they had never known one another at table, because first
Zeus’ son had killed Iphitus son of Eurytus, godlike,
he who had given the bow. But noble Odysseus never
took it along when he went to the war on the black ships sailing;
rather it stayed in his hall as a keepsake of his dear guest-friend,
but on his own land always he carried and used it.
But when now that bright queen among women came to the chamber,
and stepped upon the oaken threshold, which once a craftsman,
planing it well with his skill, had straightened true to the line there,
and in it fixed the doorposts, and fastened the shining doors on,
straightway then she quickly unloosed the strap from the handle,
thrust in the key, and she pushed back the bolts of the doors there,
aiming straight; and the doors gave bellow, like some stalled bull beast
feeding out in a meadow; so bellowed the beautiful panels,
struck by the key, and before her they flew wide open quickly.
Then she stepped on the lofty floorboards; and there stood the chests where
fragrant clothing was lying away in the boxes among them.
Reaching up from that place, from a peg she took down the bow there,
with its bright case itself, which lay all around it enclosing.
Then sitting down on the spot, and laying it there on her knees dear,
she wept very shrilly aloud, and drew forth her lord’s bow from it.
But when at last she had had her fill of the tearful lamenting,
then she went toward the hall and the haughty suitors within it,
holding in hand the bow with its backward bend, and the quiver
arrow-receiving; and many grief-giving shafts were within it.
With her the serving-women bore also a chestful of contest-gear,
where much iron was stored and bronze, the prizes of that lord.
But when she came to the suitors, that bright queen among women,
there she stood by a pillar that held the close-fitted roofing,
drawing the shining veil before her face and her cheeks there;
and a good faithful handmaid stood attending her on either side.
Then at once among all the suitors she spoke out and addressed them:
“Hear me, you overweening suitors, who over this household
feed and drink your fill continually, day after day here,
while its master is gone for so long; and you could find no other
pretext at all to put forth, no word of excuse whatsoever,
only desire to wed me and make me your own wife hereafter.
Come then, suitors, since now this contest is plainly before you.
For I will set out the great bow of godlike Odysseus.
Whoever most easily strings this bow in the grip of his hands there,
and shoots an arrow clean through the holes of all twelve axes,
him I will follow then, leaving behind me this household,
this my wedded home, so beautiful, rich in the means of existence;
this, I think, I shall yet remember even within dreams only.”
So she spoke, and commanded Eumaeus, the noble swineherd,
to set forth the bow for the suitors, and the gray iron beside it.
Weeping, Eumaeus received them, and laid them carefully down there;
and on the other side the cowherd wept, seeing his master's bow there.
Then Antinous rebuked them, and spoke, and addressed them by name thus:
“Foolish field-hand servants, with thoughts for the day and no farther,
why do you let tears pour down, poor fools, and trouble the woman's
heart in her breast, when even without that her spirit is lying
deep in pain, since she lost her beloved husband forever?
No, sit quiet and feast where you are, or else go outside there
and do your weeping, once you have left the bow here where it lies now,
an ordeal for the suitors, hard to accomplish; for truly
I do not think this polished bow will be strung up so lightly.
For there is no man among all these men assembled before us
such as Odysseus was; I myself have seen him plainly,
yes, and remember him well, though then I was only a young child.”
So he spoke; but his heart in his chest was hoping within him
he would string the cord on the bow and shoot through the iron.
Yet he was destined himself to be first to taste of the arrow
from the hands of noble Odysseus, the man whom he slighted
there as he sat in his halls, while he urged on all his companions.
Then the sacred strength of Telemachus answered among them:
“Father Zeus, son of Cronos, has made me witless indeed now.
My own dear mother tells me, though wise in her mind as she always is,
that she will go with another man, abandoning this household;
and I laugh, and delight in it, with my foolish heart in me.
Come then, suitors, since now this contest is set forth before you,
for such a woman there is not now in the whole Achaean
land, not in holy Pylos, nor in Argos, nor in Mycenae,
nor in Ithaca itself, nor the dark land over against it;
and you yourselves know this. Why should I praise my mother?
Come then, do not keep drawing this out with evasions and delays now,
nor hold back any longer from stringing the bow. Let us see it.
I myself also would make trial and test of the bow now:
if I can string it, and send the shaft clean through the iron,
then my honored mother would not leave these halls to my grieving,
going away with another, while I was left here behind her,
I who at last could take up my father's fair contest-prizes.”
So he spoke, and flung from his shoulders his cloak of crimson;
then he sprang to his feet, and put off the sharp sword from his shoulder.
First he set up the axes, after he dug out a trench there,
one long trench for them all, and he brought them true to the line there,
and stamped the earth firm round about them. Wonder seized all men
who looked on, seeing how straight he had set them, though never before then
had he seen it. Then he went to the threshold and tested the bow there.
Thrice he shook it, eager in spirit to draw it and bend it;
thrice his strength gave way, though still in his heart he was hoping
to string the cord on the bow and shoot through the iron.
And by the fourth pull now he would have strung it by force as he drew it,
but Odysseus signaled no, and restrained him despite his desire there.
Then the sacred strength of Telemachus spoke among them again:
“Ah me, surely I shall be a weakling and coward hereafter,
or else I am too young as yet, and still do not trust in
these hands of mine to defend myself from a man who assails me.
Come then, you who are stronger in strength by far than I am now,
test the bow, and let us bring this contest through to completion.”
So he spoke, and laid the bow away from himself on the ground there,
leaning it down by the closely joined panels, polished and handsome;
and he set the swift arrow against the fair-curved door-hook beside it,
then sat himself back again on the chair from which he had risen.
Then Antinous spoke among them, the son of Eupeithes:
“Rise in due order, companions, each one from left hand to right hand,
starting there from the place where the wine-pourer begins his service.”
So spoke Antinous, and his word was pleasing to all of them.
First then Leodes rose up, the son of Oenops, among them,
who was their reader of rites, and he always sat by the mixing-bowl,
deepest in the recess; to him alone their reckless behavior
was hateful, and he was indignant with all of the suitors.
He then first took up in his hands the bow and the swift arrow.
Going then to the threshold he stood there and tested the bowstring,
but he could not string it; before that, his hands as he pulled it,
soft and uncallused, grew weary; and then to the suitors he said this:
“Friends, I cannot string it. Let some other one take it and try now.
Many great men will this bow bereave of spirit and life-breath;
since indeed it is far better to die than continue living
after we fail in the thing for whose sake we are gathered together
here every day, still waiting and hoping through all of the daylight.
Now some man among us may hope in his heart and be eager
to marry Penelope, spouse of Odysseus the hero.
But when he has tested this bow and seen what it truly is like then,
let him go woo some other Achaean woman in fair robes.
let him seek her with bride-gifts and suing; and afterward she may
marry the man who offers the most and comes as her fortune.”
So then he spoke, and he set his bow away from his own hands,
leaning it down by the well-planed boards that were fitted together,
and there he propped the swift arrow close by the beautiful door-hook,
then once more he sat on the chair from which he had arisen.
But Antinous scolded him harshly and spoke out and named him:
“Leodes, what sort of a word has fled past the fence of your teeth there,
dreadful and hard to endure; I am angered to hear it spoken.
Is this bow truly to rob our best men of courage and life-breath
only because you yourself are unable to bend it and string it?
Surely your honored mother did not bear you to be such a man
as could become a drawer of bows and a shooter of arrows;
no, but the rest of the splendid suitors will string it quickly.”
So he spoke, and he gave command to Melanthius, goatherd of goats:
“Come now, Melantheus, kindle a fire in the hall for us,
set a great seat beside it, and spread a fleece on top of it,
and from the stores bring out a great round of lard from within there,
so the young men may warm it and smear it well with the grease then,
and make trial of the bow and bring the contest to ending.”
So he spoke, and at once Melanthius kindled the tireless fire there,
and carrying a great seat he set it down and laid fleece on it,
and from the stores he brought a great round of lard from within there.
With this the young men warmed it and made their trial; yet none could
string it at all, but they were far lacking in bodily vigor.
Still Antinous held back, and Eurymachus godlike beside him,
leaders of all the suitors, the finest of all in their manhood.
Then out from the house those two went forth together, both of them,
cowherd and swineherd, servants of noble Odysseus;
and after these from the house came out godlike Odysseus himself.
But when they had come outside of the doors and outside the courtyard,
then he addressed them aloud and spoke with gentle words to them:
“Cowherd, and you as well, swineherd, what word shall I speak to you?
Shall I conceal it myself? Yet my heart bids me tell it.
What sort of men would you be to defend Odysseus
if he should suddenly come here somehow, and a god should conduct him?
Would you defend the suitors, or rather stand by Odysseus?
Speak, as your own heart within you and spirit command you.”
Then the master and herdsman of cattle answered and said to him:
“Father Zeus, if only you would fulfill this longing for me,
if that man might come, and some god might lead him here to us:
then you would know what my strength is, and how my hands follow.”
And in the same way Eumaeus prayed to all of the gods there
that resourceful Odysseus might come back home to this house.
But when he had fully discerned the true mind in both of them,
then once again he answered and spoke with words to them:
“Here in the house I myself am that man; after many afflictions
I have returned in the twentieth year to my fatherland country.
I know that I come as the longed-for one to you two only
out of the slaves; of the rest I have never heard any among them
praying that I might return once more and come back to my household.
Yet to you two, exactly as all this will be, I will tell it.
If under my hand some god should subdue the splendid suitors,
I will provide for you both with wives and with goods and possessions,
and homes built close by mine; and afterward both of you shall be
comrades to me and brothers as well to Telemachus.
Come then, and let me show you another most evident token,
so that within your hearts you may know me and trust and believe me:
this scar, which once a boar struck into me with his white tusk
when I had gone to Parnassus with sons of Autolycus.”
So he spoke, and he drew back the rags from the great scar before them.
And when the two had beheld it and clearly observed every detail,
then around wise Odysseus they wept and threw both arms about him,
and they kept kissing his head and his shoulders in loving welcome;
and in the same way Odysseus kissed their heads and their hands there.
And now the light of the sun would have set on their lamentation,
had not Odysseus himself checked them and spoken and said this:
“Stop now from weeping and wailing, lest someone should see you and notice,
coming out from the hall, and then go tell those inside of it.
But go back in to the suitors one after another, not all together.
I will go first, and after me you; and let this be our token:
all the others, all these splendid and lordly suitors here,
will not permit that the bow and the quiver be handed to me.
But you, noble Eumaeus, must carry the bow through the hall there
and place it into my hands, and tell the women this also:
let them shut fast the doors of the hall with their closely fitted joinings;
and if any woman should hear a groaning or racket of menfolk
here within our walls, let her not come hurrying out through the doorway,
but stay where she is in silence and keep to the work that is by her.
And to you, noble Philoetius, I entrust the doors of the courtyard;
bolt them fast with the key, and quickly cast on the door-bar.”
So having spoken, he entered the well-inhabited household,
then he went and sat on the chair from which he had arisen;
and into the hall came in as well those two thralls of Odysseus.
Now Eurymachus already was turning the bow in his fingers,
warming it here and there in the blaze and the glow of the firelight;
yet not even so could he string it, and loudly his proud heart groaned there.
Then in vexation he spoke, and addressed them and uttered this saying:
“Oh for shame, what grief has come over me, for myself and for all men.
It is not so much for the marriage that I am lamenting,
though I am grieved; for there are many Achaean women besides her,
some in seagirt Ithaca here, and some in the other cities.
No, but if we are so far lacking the strength and the prowess
of godlike Odysseus that we cannot stretch and string
this bow, that will be a disgrace for men yet to come to hear of.”
Then in turn Antinous answered him, son of Eupeithes:
“Eurymachus, it will not be so; and you know it yourself well.
Now through the land there is held the feast of the god, and it is holy.
Who then would be bending a bow? No, let it rest there in silence.
Sit down; and the axes at least we may leave there, every one standing.
For I do not think that anyone ever will carry them off now,
coming into the hall of Odysseus, son of Laertes.
But come, let the wine-pourer first make beginning among the cups,
so that after libation we may lay down the curved bow.
Then at dawn bid Melanthius, the goatherd who tends all the she-goats,
drive in the goats that are finest by far of all in his keeping,
so that, laying the thigh-pieces on for Apollo the famed archer,
we may make trial of the bow and accomplish the contest.”
So spoke Antinous, and his speech gave pleasure to all of them.
Then the heralds poured water over their hands for the washing,
and the young men filled up the mixing-bowls, crowning them with the drink,
and passed it around to them all, beginning the service with goblets.
But when they had poured and had drunk as much as the heart was desiring,
then among them resourceful Odysseus spoke with deep cunning:
“Hear me, you suitors who court our queen of the great renown here,
so that I may say what the spirit inside of my breast is commanding.
Most of all I entreat Eurymachus now, and godlike Antinous,
since indeed he also has spoken this word in due measure:
for the present let be the bow, and entrust all the matter to heaven;
and at dawn some god will grant the victory to whom he wishes.
But come, give me the well-polished bow, that here among all of you
I may make trial of my hands and my strength, whether still there abides in me
force such as once there was in my supple and bendable members,
or whether wandering and lack of all care have ruined it wholly.”
So he spoke, and they all were indignant beyond any measure,
fearing lest he might truly string the well-polished bow there.
Then Antinous rebuked him, and addressed him and uttered this saying:
“You unhappy stranger, there are not in you even the slightest wits.
Is it not enough that in quiet among us proud men you are feasting,
nor are deprived of the meal, while you listen to all of our speeches
and to our discourse? No other stranger at all and no beggar
gets to hear the speeches and words that belong among us here.
Honey-sweet wine is what harms you, wine that also harms other men,
any man who takes it greedily down and does not drink in due measure.
Wine was what drove to madness the Centaur, the glorious Eurytion,
in the hall of Peirithous, that great-hearted lord among men there,
when he came to the Lapiths; and after the wine had deranged him,
in his frenzy he wrought evil deeds through the house of Peirithous.
Then grief took hold of the heroes, and up from their seats they sprang swiftly,
dragged him out through the porch to the open, and pitiless bronze sheared
both of his ears and his nostrils away; and he, in his spirit
crazed, went onward bearing his doom in his senseless heart with him.
From that there arose strife and feud between Centaurs and mortals;
but he, being wine-weighed down, found evil first for himself there.
So also for you I foretell a great ruin, if once you should string
this bow; for you will encounter no kindness from anyone
here in our land, but at once in a black ship we shall send you
to King Echetus, the bane of all mortals living upon earth.
And from him you will not escape. So drink in quiet, and do not
strive in contention with men who are younger and stronger than you are.”
Then prudent Penelope answered him, watchful in spirit:
“Antinous, it is neither good nor just to dishonor
guests of Telemachus, whoever should come to the doors of this household.
Do you suppose that if this stranger should string great Odysseus’ bow here,
trusting his hands and the strength that belongs to his body,
he will lead me homeward with him and make me his own wife there?
Not even he himself, I think, hopes this within his own bosom.
Let not one of you then sit grieving in spirit about this hereafter,
feasting here in this hall, since this would not be fitting at all.”
Then Eurymachus, Polybus’ son, addressed her in answer:
“Daughter of Icarius, prudent Penelope, hear us:
it is not this that we think, that he will carry you off; that is not fitting.
No, but we shrink from the talk of men and of women,
lest at some time one baser Achaean should say it:
“Men far inferior woo the wife of a blameless man here,
yet they cannot string his bow, well-polished and shapely;
but some other beggared man, a wanderer, came among them,
easily bent the bow and shot straight through all the iron.”
Thus they will speak, and this would become our reproach and dishonor.”
Then in turn wise-hearted Penelope answered him:
“Eurymachus, there is no way for men to have fair glory
through all the land, when they consume and dishonor the household
of a man who is better than they are. Why make this a disgrace, then?
This stranger here is indeed a tall man and strongly fashioned,
and he declares that he is a son of a noble father.
Come then, give him the polished bow, so that we may behold him.
For thus I will speak, and this thing also shall be accomplished:
if he shall string it, and Apollo grant him the glory,
I will clothe him in cloak and in tunic, garments of beauty,
and I will give him a sharp javelin, warder from dogs and from men too,
and a two-edged sword; I will give him sandals beneath him,
and send him wherever his heart and spirit command him.”
Then clear-souled Telemachus answered her face to face, saying:
“Mother of mine, of the Achaeans there is not any better
than I am to give this bow, if I choose, or refuse it,
neither of all who hold sway throughout rugged Ithaca,
nor of those in the islands toward horse-pasturing Elis.
Not one of these will constrain me against my will, if I wish it,
even to give to the stranger this bow, to bear it away with him always.
But go to the house and attend to the works that are yours there,
to the loom and the distaff, and bid your handmaids beside you
follow their work. The bow shall be matter of care for the menfolk,
for all men, but for me above all; for the power is mine in the household.”
She in amazement turned and went back again to the house there,
for she laid up within her heart her son’s prudent saying.
Then to the upper room she climbed with attendant women,
and there she wept for Odysseus, her own dear husband,
till on her eyelids bright-eyed Athena cast sweet sleep there.
Then the noble swineherd took up and carried the curved bow;
and all the suitors at once raised a clamor through the hall there.
Thus would a man among those overbearing young men be saying:
“Where are you taking the curved bow, miserable swineherd,
vagabond? Soon out among your swine the swift dogs will devour you,
lone and apart from men, the dogs that you yourself reared,
if Apollo should grant us his grace, and the other immortals.”
So they spoke, and he set it down where he stood while he carried it,
frightened, because many men were shouting together in hall there.
But from the other side Telemachus called out and threatened:
“Old friend, carry the bow on forward. You will not obey all men gladly.
Otherwise, though younger than you, I will drive you to the fields there,
hurling stones at you, since in strength I am stronger than you are.
If only against all these men, as many as are in the house here,
all the suitors, I were the stronger in hands and in vigor,
then I would quickly send some one of them wretchedly homeward,
out of our house, since it is evil they scheme and devise here.”
So he spoke, and all the suitors laughed out sweetly upon him,
and indeed let go of their bitter anger against Telemachus.
Then through the hall the swineherd, carrying the bow, came onward
and stood by Odysseus, master of craft, and put it into his hands there.
Then he called to the nurse and spoke to Eurycleia:
“Telemachus bids you, prudent Eurycleia, hear him:
bar the doors of the hall, close-fitted firmly together.
If any woman should hear within the house some groaning
or the crash of men inside our walls, let her not go outward
peering from doors, but stay there quietly beside her labor.”
So he spoke, and for her the word was wingless and stayed there;
and she barred the doors of the halls of the well-built dwelling.
Silently out of the house Philoetius sprang through the doorway,
and after that he barred the gates of the well-fenced courtyard.
Under the porch there lay a cable of seafaring vessel,
twisted of byblus, with which he bound fast the gates, then returned there,
and going back sat down on the stool from which he had risen,
watching Odysseus. And he already was handling the bow there,
turning it over and over, and testing it this way and that way,
lest worms might have eaten the horn in the absence of its master.
Thus a man would say, glancing over toward one who was near him:
“Surely a connoisseur and an expert thief of bows, this fellow;
likely such things as these are lying somewhere at home for him,
or he is eager to make one, so he turns it in his hands there,
this way and that, this vagrant well-schooled in suffering and evil.”
Then another would say of the young men swollen with arrogance:
“May he be met with as much of profit and blessing hereafter
as ever this man will succeed in stringing that weapon.”
So said the suitors; but then resourceful Odysseus,
when he had taken the great bow up and looked it all over,
just as a man well skilled in the lyre and practiced in singing
easily stretches a string around on a newly made tuning-peg,
fixing the well-twisted gut at the two ends with ease there,
so without strain did Odysseus string the great bow in a moment.
Then with his right hand he took and tested the string of it;
sweetly it sang beneath, like the voice of a twittering swallow.
Then upon all the suitors there came a great sorrow and terror;
all of their color was changed, and Zeus gave a mighty thunder,
and then much-enduring noble Odysseus rejoiced there,
glad that the son of shrewd-counseling Cronos had sent him a portent.
Then he took up a swift arrow lying bare on the table;
all of the others within the hollow quiver were stored there,
those that the Achaeans would soon be made to encounter.
Laying it on the bow’s grip, he drew the string and the arrow-nock,
there from the stool where he sat, and let the shaft fly from him,
aiming straight before him; he missed not one of the axe-heads,
starting with the first socket, and clean through all of them passed then
the bronze-heavy arrow and went on through to the outside. Then he said:
“Telemachus, the guest sitting here in your halls does not shame you;
I did not miss this mark, nor was I long in stringing the bow here.
Still my strength is firm within me and has not yet failed me,
not as the suitors declare in their scorn and contempt of me.
But now it is time for supper to be made for the Achaeans
while there is still some light, and thereafter in other fashion
to take our delight with song and the lyre, the feast’s adornment.”
So he spoke and nodded the signal with brows to his son there;
then Telemachus, dear son of the godlike Odysseus,
slung on his sharp sword and clasped in his dear hand his spear-shaft,
and stood by his father’s throne in glittering armor of bronze there.
