The Odyssey — Book XVI

Father and son: the recognition at the swineherd's hut.

There in the hut were Odysseus and noble swineherd,
making the morning meal at dawn, after kindling the firelight,
and they had sent out the swineherds along with the huddled swineherds;
round Telemachus meanwhile the sharp-barking dogs came fawning,
neither barked as he approached; and noble Odysseus marked it,
noticing how the dogs fawned round, and the sound came of footsteps.
Quickly then he addressed Eumaeus with winged words, saying:
“Eumaeus, surely now some comrade of yours will be coming,
or some other familiar man, since the dogs do not bark here,
but they are fawning around him; and I hear the thud of feet too.”
Not yet had the whole word been spoken, when there stood his dear son
there in the doorway; the swineherd sprang up in amazement,
and from his hands fell down the vessels with which he was toiling,
mixing the flaming wine; and he went straight toward his master,
kissed his head, and both of his beautiful radiant eyes there,
and both of his hands; and a warm tear fell from his eyelids.
As when a father with love in his heart folds close his own dear son,
coming back from a distant land in the tenth returning year,
his only child, late-born, for whom he has suffered great anguish,
so then the noble swineherd embraced godlike Telemachus,
kissed him all over and round, like one who escaped from destruction,
and in his lamentation he spoke winged words and addressed him:
“You have come, Telemachus, sweet light of my eyes and my spirit.
I had said I would never behold you again, once you sailed to Pylos.
Come now, dear child, come inside, so that deep in my spirit
I may delight in the sight of you, come from elsewhere returning.
Not very often you come to the farm or visit the herdsmen,
but you remain in the town; for so, it seems, your heart has preferred it,
gazing upon that ruinous crowd of the suitor-men there.”
Then in return wise Telemachus answered and spoke to him:
“It shall be so, old father; for your sake I have come here now,
so I may see you with my eyes and hear from your speaking
whether my mother still remains in the halls, or whether already
some other man has married her, while Odysseus’ bed there
lies without sleepers and keeps only foul-spun webs of the spider.”
Then the swineherd replied to him, that captain of people:
“Surely indeed she remains there, enduring in patient spirit,
in your halls; and always for her in unending affliction
nights and days alike are consumed while she sheds many tear-drops.”
So saying, he took from his hand the bronze-shining spearshaft;
then he himself went inward and crossed the threshold of stone there.
As he came toward the seat, his father Odysseus yielded;
but Telemachus checked him from the other side and called to him:
“Sit, stranger; elsewhere in our own farmstead we shall find seating.
There is a man at hand who will set it in place for you promptly.”
So he spoke, and Odysseus went back and sat in his place then;
and underneath him the swineherd strewn green brushwood, and over
laid a fleece; and there sat down the dear son of Odysseus.
Then the swineherd set before them platters of roasted meats there,
portions they had left over before from the meal of the past day;
quickly he brought and heaped up the bread in the wicker baskets,
and in an ivy-wood cup he mixed the honey-sweet wine there;
then he himself sat down opposite godlike Odysseus.
And to the good things prepared and set out they reached with their hands then.
But when they had cast from themselves the desire for eating and drinking,
then Telemachus spoke to the noble swineherd and asked him:
“Old father, from where has this stranger of yours come hither to us?
How did the sailors bring him to Ithaca? Who did they claim they
were? For I do not suppose that he came to this place here on foot.”
Then you in answer addressed him, Eumaeus the swineherd:
“Therefore, my child, I shall tell you the whole truth of the matter.
He declares that his stock is from spacious dancing-grounded Crete-land,
and he says he has wandered through many the cities of mortals,
driven astray; for thus has some god spun the thread of it for him.
Now having fled from a ship of the Thesprotian fighting men yonder,
he has come to my farmstead, and I place him now in your keeping.
Do as you will; for he claims and declares he is your suppliant.”
Then in return wise Telemachus answered and spoke to him:
“Eumaeus, surely this word that you spoke is painful and heartfelt.
How in the world shall I welcome this stranger into my dwelling?
I am still young myself, and not yet do I trust in my hand-strength
to defend any man, when another begins with aggression.
And in my mother the spirit within her breast is divided,
whether to stay here beside me and keep the house in good order,
revering her husband’s bed and the voice of the people about her,
or else by now to go with whatever Achaean is noblest,
one who woos in the halls and offers the greatest bride-gifts.
Yet for this stranger, since he has come to your house as a comer,
I shall give him a cloak and a tunic, fine beautiful clothing,
and I shall give him a two-edged sword and sandals for his footsoles,
and I will send him wherever his heart and his spirit may bid him.
But if you wish it, keep him here, giving him care at the farmstead;
here I will send him clothing and all of the food that is needful
for him to eat, so he may not wear you away and your comrades.
But I for my part would not let him go there among suitors;
far too reckless indeed is the violent outrage they harbor.
They would make him their mock, and for me it would be a great heartache.
Hard is the task for one man to accomplish a thing against many,
though he be strong; for indeed they are men of much greater power.”
Then in answer to him spoke much-enduring noble Odysseus:
“Dear friend, since now it is right that I also should make you an answer,
truly my own dear heart is gnawed away here as I listen,
hearing the things you tell of the suitors’ reckless contrivings
there in the halls, against your will, though you are such a man as this one.
Tell me whether you bow beneath them by choice, or whether the people
hate you throughout the land, as they follow a god’s declaration,
or whether you blame your brothers, on whom a man may rely still
there in the clash of battle, even if great strife should arise there.
If only I were so young, with this spirit here in my bosom,
or were a son of blameless Odysseus, or else were Odysseus himself;
then may some stranger at once strike the head from me and cut it away off,
if I did not become a bane to the whole of that company, all of them,
going into the hall of Odysseus, son of Laertes.
And if they by their numbers subdued me, being all alone there,
I would choose rather, struck down in my own halls, to meet death,
than forever keep seeing these shameful deeds before my eyes there,
guests being brutally mauled, and the female servants dragged by force
shamefully all through the rooms of the beautiful house and the chambers,
and the wine being drained and squandered, and men eating the food there
vainly and without end, for a thing that will never be finished.”
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered and spoke to him thuswise:
“Therefore, stranger, I now will tell you the truth of the matter.
It is not that the whole of the people hates me and bears me resentment,
nor am I blaming brothers, on whom a man may rely still
there in the clash of battle, even if great strife should arise there.
So has the son of Cronos made thin our line and diminished it:
Arceisius fathered Laertes, an only son only;
and Laertes’ son was Odysseus, born as an only son likewise;
and Odysseus fathered only me in the halls, and he had no joy of me.
Therefore the house is full of foes beyond all counting against me.
For all the nobles who hold lordship over the islands,
over Dulichium and Same and wooded Zacynthus,
and all who rule as lords throughout rocky Ithaca,
all these are wooing my mother and wearing away at the household.
She neither refuses the hateful marriage nor can she bring matters
to an end; and they keep consuming and wasting away my possessions.
Soon enough they will rend me apart and destroy me as well here.
But surely indeed these things lie still on the knees of the deathless.
Come, old friend, go quickly and tell discreet Penelope
that I am safe for her and have returned from sandy Pylos.
I myself will remain here; but you must come back to this place here
after reporting to her alone; let none of the other Achaeans
learn it, since many indeed are devising destruction against me.”
Then in answer to him you spoke, Eumaeus the swineherd:
“I know it, I understand; you command one who thinks on these matters.
But come now, tell me this and recount it exactly and truly:
should I go on the same road and carry the message to Laertes,
miserable man, who before, though grieving sore for Odysseus,
still used to oversee the work with the slaves on his farmland,
and to eat and to drink in the house, when the spirit within him should prompt him?
But now, from the day that you went with the ship on your way to Pylos,
they say that he no longer eats and drinks in the old way,
nor looks to the work of the fields, but with moaning and bitter lamenting
sits there and mourns, and the flesh all wastes from around his bones there.”
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered and spoke to him thuswise:
“More painful indeed; but even so, though we grieve, we will leave him.
For if all things whatever could come by the choosing of mortals,
first of all we would choose the day of my father’s returning.
No, but go with the message, then turn yourself back; do not wander
over the fields in search of him; but say to my mother
that she should urge the housekeeper handmaid to go with all quickness,
secretly; she indeed could carry the news to the old man.”
So he spoke and stirred up the swineherd; he took in his hands then
both of his sandals, and bound them beneath his feet, and went cityward. Neither
did it escape Athena that gone from the farm was Eumaeus
but she herself came near; and in bodily form she resembled
a woman beautiful, tall, and well skilled in glorious handwork.
There by the doorway she stood at the hut, made visible to Odysseus.
Yet Telemachus did not see her before him nor notice;
for not to all men alike do the gods show plainly their presence.
But Odysseus saw her, and so did the dogs, yet they did not bark there,
but with frightened whimpering shrank to the far side of the farmyard.
Then with her brows she signaled; resourceful Odysseus perceived it,
and he came out of the hall, passing the high wall of the courtyard,
and stood there facing her; then Athena spoke and addressed him:
“Son of Laertes, seed of Zeus, Odysseus of many devices,
now at this moment speak to your son and no longer conceal it,
so that, when you have fixed doom and death for the suitors upon them,
you may go to the famed-walled town; and I myself will not linger
long away from you both, for my heart is eager for battle.”
So she spoke, and Athena then touched him there with her golden wand.
First she cast about his breast a mantle well washed and a tunic,
and she increased his stature and brought back the bloom of his young manhood.
Then once more his skin became dark, and his cheeks filled out firmly,
and blue-black grew the beard all around on the line of his chin there.
She, when she had done this, went back again; but Odysseus
went to the hut, and his dear son looked on him in amazement.
Fearful, he turned his eyes away, in dread lest it might be a god there,
and lifting his voice he addressed him in winged words and spoke thus:
“Stranger, to me you appear quite changed from the man you were just now.
Other indeed are the clothes that you wear, and your skin is not the same.
Surely you are one of the gods who possess the broad heaven above us.
Be gracious, that we may present you with welcome offerings and with gifts,
fashioned in gold; only spare us, I pray, and take pity upon us.”
Then in answer to him spoke the much-enduring noble Odysseus:
“I am no god. Why is it that you compare me with the immortals?
No, I am your father, for whose sake you suffer in sorrow and groaning,
bearing much pain and enduring the violent outrage of menfolk.”
So he spoke, and he kissed his son; from his cheeks to the ground then
tears fell down, though before he had always held back his weeping.
Yet Telemachus, since he had not yet been persuaded within him
that this was truly his father, again made answer and said to him:
“You are not Odysseus, not my father, but some divinity tricks me,
so that hereafter I may lament and grieve in yet greater abundance.
For no mortal man could contrive these things by the wit in his own breast,
unless some god himself had come here and stood by him in person,
and with ease made him young or else made him an old man, at pleasure.
For indeed just now you were old and wore most unseemly clothing,
but now you are like the gods who possess the broad heaven above us.”
Then in answer to him spoke the craft-rich, wise Odysseus:
“Telemachus, it is not fitting that you, with your father beside you,
should marvel beyond all measure or be so greatly astonished.
No other Odysseus will ever come here to you any longer,
but I am he, just such as I am, after suffering evils and wandering much,
and in the twentieth year I have come to the land of my fathers.
Yet this is the work of Athena, the driver and giver of spoil there,
who made me such as I am, in whatever way she desires, for she can,
now making me like a beggar, and now once more in another fashion
like to a young man wearing fine garments close over his body.
Easy it is for the gods who possess the broad heaven above us
both to exalt a mortal man and also to bring him to ruin.”
So he spoke, and he sat him down; and Telemachus, flinging his arms round
his noble father, wept aloud, and tears ran down in a torrent.
In both of them there arose the desire for lamentation and mourning.
They cried aloud and sharply, more ceaselessly even than wild birds do,
ospreys or vultures with hooked claws, whose little unfledged nestlings
country men have taken away from the nest before they could fly upward.
So from beneath their brows they let fall piteous tears in abundance.
And the light of the sun would have set on them as they still lamented,
had not Telemachus suddenly spoken to his own dear father:
“Tell me, dear father, by what ship did sailors bring you hither
into Ithaca? Who did they claim that they were among men there?
I do not think that you could have come here traveling on footpaths.”
Then in answer to him spoke the much-enduring noble Odysseus:
“Then indeed, my child, I will tell you the truth of this matter.
The Phaeacians brought me, renowned for the speed of their shipping,
they who convey other men as well, whoever reaches their people.
They were carrying me over the sea in a swift ship while I slumbered,
and they set me ashore in Ithaca and gave me splendid possessions,
bronze in abundance and gold and woven garments in plenty.
These now by the will of the gods lie stored away in the caverns.
Now I have come here following counsels and promptings of Athena,
so that together we may take thought for the slaughter of foemen.
Come then, tell me the number of suitors and count them before me,
so that I may know how many they are and what manner of men they are.
Then after turning it over within my impeccable spirit,
I will consider whether we two could stand up against them in combat,
all alone without others, or whether we should seek additional helpers.”
Then in answer to him spoke the thoughtful prince Telemachus:
“Father, indeed I have always been hearing the greatness of your glory,
how your hand is a spearman’s in fight, and your counsel is prudent;
but what you have said is too vast; amazement has seized me, for never
could two men battle with many, and those men stalwart in prowess.
For the suitors are not in exactness ten men, nor twice ten only,
but far more numerous; quickly you will know the full tale of their number.
Out of Dulichium there are two and fifty young nobles,
picked men, and with them six servants attending in order;
out of Same there are four and twenty men in all there,
out of Zacynthus there are twenty young Achaean princes,
and from Ithaca itself twelve men, all of them finest;
with them are Medon the herald, and the godlike singer,
and two attendants well skilled in the carving and sharing of portions.
If we two should encounter all these while they are inside here,
take care lest bitter and grim be the price of your vengeance upon them.
No, but do you, if you can devise some champion to aid us,
think on one who will stand by us two with a heart that is willing.”
Then in answer to him spoke the much-enduring great Odysseus:
“Then I will tell you; do you attend and hearken unto me fully.
Consider if Athena with father Zeus beside her in favor
will be enough for us two, or I should seek some other defender.”
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him face to face there:
“Noble indeed are those two champions of whom you are speaking,
though they sit high up above in the clouds; and over all others
they hold sway, over mortal men and the gods who are deathless.”
Then in answer to him spoke the much-enduring great Odysseus:
“Those two shall not for long stand apart from the turmoil and onrush
of the strong battle, whenever among the suitors and us here
in my halls the might of Ares is brought to the test and decision.
But for now you must go at the hour when dawn is appearing
home to the house, and mix with the suitors so haughty and reckless;
later the swineherd himself will conduct me on into the city,
like to a beggar in wretchedness, and to an old man in semblance.
If they dishonor me there through the house, then let your dear spirit
bear it within your breast while I suffer evils before you,
even if they drag me by both of my feet through the hall and outdoors,
or if they pelt me with missiles; do you, though looking, endure it.
Yet indeed you may bid them desist from their folly and madness,
speaking to them with gentle words by way of persuasion; but never
will they obey you, for now their destined day is at hand there.
One thing more will I tell you, and do you lay it in your spirit:
when resourceful Athena shall put this design in my inward heart,
I will give you a sign with my head, and you then, when you mark it,
all the war-gear that lies in the hall and belongs unto Ares,
lift and carry away and store in the nook of the high chamber,
every bit of it; then if the suitors should ask and should miss them,
turn them aside with gentle words whenever they question:
“Out of the smoke I removed them, since now they no longer resembled
such as Odysseus left when he went away thence unto Troy-land,
but are begrimed, to the degree that the breath of the fire has reached them.
And besides, the son of Cronos has set this greater thought in me:
lest perhaps, when wine has inflamed you, you stir up contention
and wound one another, and bring disgrace on the feast and the wooing;
for iron itself by its own force draws and entices a man on.”
But for us two alone leave two swords and likewise two spears there,
and two shields of oxhide for us to take up in our hands then,
so that we may rush on them and master them once we have armed us;
after that Pallas Athena and Zeus of the counsels will daze them.
One thing more will I tell you, and do you lay it in your spirit:
if truly you are my son and are sprung from the blood that is ours here,
let no one thereafter hear that Odysseus is present indoors here,
let not Laertes know it, nor even the swineherd be told it,
nor any one else of the household, nor even Penelope learn it;
but let only you and I find out the temper of women,
and thereafter we might even test the men among all your servants,
learning where one of them honors us two and fears us within him,
and who has no care and dishonors you, noble though you are.”
Then his shining son in return made answer and spoke unto him:
“Father, indeed you will know my spirit hereafter, I think so;
for no weakness of mind and no folly possesses me, surely.
Yet I do not suppose that this plan will turn to advantage
for us both; I bid you consider it well in your own spirit.
Long will you spend in going about and testing each person,
visiting each at his work, while they in the halls without trouble
raven and waste our substance with violence, sparing none of it.
Yet as for the women, I urge that you learn and distinguish them,
both the ones who dishonor you and the guiltless among them.
But the men on the farms I for my part should not wish that we test now,
rather let us leave that for later and suffer it afterward,
if indeed you truly know some sign from Zeus who carries the aegis.”
So in such words they spoke and addressed one another together.
Then the well-fashioned ship was now bearing in toward Ithaca,
she that brought Telemachus home from Pylos with all his companions.
When at last they had come inside the deep-bosomed harbor,
then they hauled the black ship up and ashore on the mainland,
and the high-hearted servants carried away all their armor,
and at once they conveyed the beautiful gifts to Clytius’ dwelling.
Then they sent on a herald ahead to the house of Odysseus,
bringing word to wise-hearted and wary-minded Penelope,
that Telemachus stayed in the fields, but ordered the vessel
now to sail on to the town, so the queen in her spirit
might not fear and let the tender tear run down from her eyelids.
There the herald and noble swineherd encountered each other,
both on the selfsame errand, to speak to the woman and tell her.
But when they came to the house of the godlike king there,
then the herald spoke out in the midst of the serving-women:
“Now indeed, my queen, your beloved son has come to you homeward.”
But the swineherd, standing near, spoke then to Penelope,
all that her own dear son had commanded that he should tell her.
But when now he had spoken the whole of the charge entrusted,
then he went on his way to the swine, and left court and hall there.
Then the suitors were pained, and in spirit were darkened and downcast,
and they came from the hall and passed by the great wall of the courtyard,
and there in front of the doors they sat themselves down together.
Then Eurymachus, son of Polybus, started to speak there:
“Friends, this is truly a great exploit brought off in presumption,
this voyage of Telemachus; and yet we said he would not end it.
Come, let us haul down a black ship, whichever is best for us,
and let us gather rowers, men of the sea, to man her,
so they may swiftly announce to those others to voyage homeward.”
He had not yet spoken it all, when Amphinomus saw her,
turning about from his place, within the deep-bosomed harbor,
as they were furling the sail and holding the oars in their hands there.
Then with easy laughter he called and spoke to his comrades:
“Let us no longer press any message on others; they are here now.
Either one of the gods has told them of this, or they themselves saw
the ship passing by, but they had no power at all to overtake her.”
So he spoke, and they rose and went to the shore of the sea there.
Quickly they hauled the black ship up and ashore on the mainland,
and the high-hearted servants carried away all their armor.
Then they themselves all together went into the place of assembly,
nor did they allow any other to sit there, young men or old ones.
Then Antinous spoke among them, the son of Eupeithes:
“Oh for shame, how the gods have released this man out of ruin.
Day after day our lookouts sat on the windy headlands,
ever in relays; and then whenever the sun had gone under,
never on shore did we spend the night, but out on the sea there
sailing our swift ship onward we waited for bright Dawn’s appearing,
lying in ambush for brave Telemachus, so we might take him
and make an end of his life; but a god brought him home in the meanwhile.
Come then, here let us ponder a grim destruction against him,
Telemachus, so he may not slip free from our hands; for I tell you,
while he is living, I think this affair will not come to fulfillment.
For he himself now is skilled in counsel and strong understanding,
and the people are no longer wholly inclined to support us.
Come then, before he can gather the Achaeans into assembly,
let us act; for I think he will not put off the matter much longer,
but in his anger will stand in the midst of them all and speak out,
how we contrived sheer murder for him, yet could not destroy him.
They will not praise us at all when they hear of these evil actions.
Let us beware lest they do us some harm and drive us in exile
out of our own dear land, and we come to a people of strangers.
Rather let us kill him when we catch him out in the farmland,
far from the city, or else on the road; then his livelihood, all his
substance and goods, we ourselves may divide into portions among us,
while to his mother we give the house to possess with the man who shall wed her.
But if this plan is displeasing to you, and rather you wish it
that he himself should live and hold all his father’s possessions,
then let us no more continue assembling here in abundance,
wasting his rich stores away, but let each man go from his own house
and seek her hand with gifts of wooing and costly bride-offerings;
then she may marry the one who gives most and comes by fate to her.”
So he spoke, and they all became utterly silent in stillness.
Then Amphinomus rose to address them and answer among them,
glorious son of Nisus, descended from lord Aretias,
who from Dulichium rich in wheat and abundant in meadow
led the suitors, and most of them all he was pleasing to her there,
to Penelope, by his words, for he had a well-meaning spirit.
Thinking good for them all, he rose and spoke in their gathering:
“Friends, for my part I would not be willing to slaughter
brave Telemachus; dreadful it is to kill the blood of a ruler.
Slaying him; yet first let us ask for the counsels of heaven.
If the decrees of great Zeus give praise and assent to the killing,
I myself will kill him, and urge all the others to help me;
but if the gods turn us back, I command you to stop.”
So spoke Amphinomus, and his counsel was pleasing among them.
Then at once they arose and went to the house of Odysseus,
and when they had entered they sat on the polished chairs there.
Then resourceful Penelope pondered another intention:
to appear to the suitors, those men of arrogant outrage.
For she had heard in the halls of the murder designed for her dear son;
for the herald Medon had told her, who heard their devising.
Then she went on her way to the hall with her women attendants.
But when among suitors the godlike queen of women had come there,
she stood by the pillar that held the close-fitted roof of the chamber,
lifting her shining veil and holding it there by her fair cheeks,
and she rebuked Antinous, spoke, and addressed him directly:
“Antinous, full of outrage, deviser of evil and cunning,
they say in the land of Ithaca, there with the men of your own age,
you are the best in counsel and speech; but you were not such a man.
Reckless one, why are you weaving death and destruction for Telemachus,
and why do you not care for suppliants, over whom lord Zeus
stands as witness? It is not holy to weave evil against one another.
Do you not know when your own father came here as a fugitive,
fearing the people? For bitterly angry indeed they had grown then,
because he had joined the Taphian sea-raiders in harrying
the Thesprotians, men who had long been allies and friends to us.
Then they were eager to kill him and tear out the heart in his bosom,
and to devour all his abundant and heart-delighting substance;
but Odysseus restrained them and held them back in their eagerness.
Now you dishonor his house as you eat it away, and you woo his wife too;
you are killing his son, and you grieve me exceedingly deeply.
Therefore I bid you stop, and command all the rest to stop likewise.”
Then Eurymachus, son of Polybus, answered before her:
“Daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, take courage.
Do not let these things be matters of care in your spirit.
There is no such man, nor will there be, nor can one be born ever,
who will lay violent hands on your son Telemachus
while I am still alive and looking upon the light of the earth here.
For thus I will speak, and surely the thing will be brought to fulfillment:
quickly his black blood would flow all around my spear-shaft,
that man's; for city-sacking Odysseus often before now
sat me upon his knees and placed roast meat in my own hands,
and held out red wine to me and let me drink from the cup there.
Therefore Telemachus is by far the dearest to me of all mortals,
and I tell him he need not fear death at the hands of the suitors;
but from the gods there is no escape for any man living.”
So he spoke, to encourage her; yet he himself planned the death-stroke.
Then she went up again to her bright upper chamber in silence,
and there she wept for Odysseus, her own beloved husband,
until bright-eyed Athena cast sweet sleep down over her eyelids.
At evening the noble swineherd came back to Odysseus
and his son; and the two were making ready the evening meal there,
after they sacrificed a yearling pig; but Athena beside them,
standing close by Odysseus, the son of Laertes, there present,
struck him with her wand and turned him again to an old man,
and clothed his body around with wretched garments, lest the swineherd
seeing him there face to face should know who he was and then hasten
to bring the news to prudent Penelope, not keeping it hidden.
Then Telemachus was the first to address him in speaking:
“You have come, noble Eumaeus. What word is abroad through the city?
Are the proud suitors already inside the hall and returned now
from their ambush, or are they still watching my road as I travel?”
Then you answered and spoke to him, Eumaeus the swineherd:
“I had no care to inquire of these things or ask as I traveled
down through the town; my spirit urged me as quickly as possible
first to deliver the message, then to turn and come back here again.
And a swift messenger met me, sent on before by your comrades,
a herald, who indeed was the first to speak to your mother.
Yet this much also I know, for I saw it myself with my own eyes.
Already above the city, where stands the hill that is Hermes',
I was going along when I saw a swift ship making descent there
into our harbor; and many men were aboard within her,
and she was laden with shields and spears with points at both edges.
I supposed they were those men, but I do not know it for certain.”
So he spoke, and the sacred strength of Telemachus smiled there,
glancing toward his father with his eyes, while avoiding the swineherd.
But when they had ceased from their labor and made all the meal ready,
then they feasted, and none of their hearts lacked the equal portion.
But when they had put from them the desire for drinking and eating,
then they remembered the bed, and accepted the gift of sleep.
