The Odyssey — Book XVII

The beggar comes to his own house; Argus; Antinous' footstool.

When the Dawn had appeared, the early-born rose-fingered goddess,
then under his feet he bound on the beautiful sandals,
Telemachus, dear-loved son of the godlike Odysseus,
and he took up the stout spear, well fitted into his palm there,
eager to go to the town, and he spoke to his swineherd, saying:
“Old father, now I am going to town, so that my mother
may set eyes on me; for I do not think she will ever
cease from her grim lamentation and tear-laden mourning
till she has seen me myself. But to you I give this charge now.
Lead this unhappy stranger to town, so that once he is there
he may beg for his meal; and whoever is willing will give him
morsel of bread and a cup. It is no way possible for me
to put up with all men, when griefs are upon my own spirit.
If the stranger is deeply angered, the worse it will be for him.
For indeed it is dear to me to speak out truth without hiding.”
Then resourceful Odysseus in answer spoke back to him, saying:
“My dear friend, I myself have no wish to be held back either.
Better it is for a beggar to beg for his meal in the city
rather than out in the fields; and whoever is willing will give me.
For I am no longer so young that I should remain at the cattle-stalls
and in all things obey whatever an overseer tells me.
But go on; and this man here, the one whom you are commanding,
will lead me, once I have warmed by the fire and daylight has come there.
For these garments I have are miserably poor; do not let the
morning frost overcome me; and you say the town lies far off.”
So he spoke, and Telemachus went through the yard of the farmstead,
striding swiftly with his feet, and sowing evils for suitors.
But when he came to the house well built and fitly inhabited,
there he stood up his spear as he carried it by a tall pillar,
and he himself went within and crossed the threshold of stone there.
Him the first one by far to perceive was the nurse Eurycleia,
as she was spreading soft fleeces upon the elaborate chairs there.
Then with tears she came straight toward him, and around him the others,
women enslaved of Odysseus, enduring of spirit, were gathered,
and with affection they kissed his head and both of his shoulders.
Out from her chamber then came circumspect-minded Penelope,
like to Artemis, or like to golden Aphrodite,
and weeping she cast her arms all around her beloved son’s body,
and she kissed his head and both the bright beautiful eyes there,
and in lamentation she spoke to him winged words, saying:
“You have come, Telemachus, sweet light. I truly had never
thought I should look upon you again, when by ship you had journeyed
secretly off to Pylos, against my desire, for tidings
of your dear father. But come now, tell me whatever you witnessed.”
Then in turn clear-headed Telemachus answered her, saying:
“Mother, do not awaken my weeping, nor stir up my heart more
here in my breast, when I have but escaped a sheer destruction.
Rather, go bathe yourself, and take clean garments upon you,
then with your serving women go up to the upper chamber,
and pray to all the gods that you will offer complete hecatombs
if perhaps Zeus may ever accomplish requital in actions.
But I shall go to the place of assembly, so I may summon
the guest who came hither with me as I traveled back from that country.
Him I sent on ahead with my comrades equal to immortals,
and instructed Piraeus to take him along to his dwelling
and to treat him with kindness and honor until I have come there.”
So then he spoke, and for her his word became wingless and silent.
She then bathed herself, and took clean garments upon her body,
and she prayed to all the gods that she would offer complete hecatombs
if perhaps Zeus might ever accomplish requital in actions.
Then Telemachus afterward passed through the hall and went outward,
holding his spear; and together with him went two swift dogs also.
Wondrous grace then Athena poured out over him in abundance,
and all of the people gazed upon him in wonder as he came there.
Round him the haughty suitors assembled themselves in a circle,
speaking fair words, but devising dark evils deep in their spirits.
But he then turned aside from the thick press and tumult among them,
going where Mentor sat, and Antiphus, and Halitherses,
men who from the beginning had been his father’s companions.
There he went and sat down, and they questioned him over each matter.
Then to them came near Piraeus, renowned for the spear in battle,
leading the guest through the town to the place of assembly; nor long then
did Telemachus stay apart from the guest, but stood beside him.
And Piraeus was first to address him and speak out, saying:
“Telemachus, quickly now send some women along to my dwelling,
so I may send you the gifts that Menelaus gave to you.”
Then in turn clear-headed Telemachus answered him, saying:
“Piraeus, we do not yet know how these matters will issue.
If in my halls the haughty suitors should secretly kill me,
and divide all my father’s possessions among them in portions,
I would have you enjoy them yourself, rather than any of those men;
but if against these men I shall plant bloody death and destruction,
then bring them home to my house with gladness, and I shall be gladdened.”
So he spoke, and led the much-enduring stranger on to the household.
But when they had come to the halls where the family dwelt in comfort,
first they laid down their cloaks on the benches and carved chairs there,
then stepped into polished bathing-tubs and bathed their bodies.
And when the serving-women had bathed them and rubbed them with olive,
and had cast round them thick warm cloaks and tunics upon them,
out from the baths they stepped and seated themselves on the benches.
Then a maidservant brought them water and poured from a pitcher
over a silver basin, from a beautiful vessel of gold there,
so they might wash; and beside them she drew up a polished table.
Then the grave housekeeper brought in bread and set it before them,
placing many good things beside it, giving freely from what was there.
Over against them his mother sat down by the pillar of the hall there,
leaning back in her chair and twisting the fine-spun wool with her fingers.
Then they reached out their hands to the good things laid ready before them.
But when they had cast from them the desire for drink and for eating,
then prudent Penelope first began speaking among them:
“Telemachus, I for my part shall go up to my upper chamber
and lie down upon that bed which has been made for my grieving,
always befouled with the tears that are mine, from the hour when Odysseus
went with the sons of Atreus away to Ilios; yet you could not bear,
before the overbearing suitors came back into this house here,
to tell me clearly your father’s return, if perhaps you had heard it.”
Then wise Telemachus answered his mother and spoke in return thus:
“Therefore, my mother, to you I shall tell the whole truth of the matter.
We went to Pylos, to Nestor, the shepherd and ruler of peoples.
He received me there in his lofty halls with all loving-kindness,
and cherished me warmly, just as a father cherishes his own son
come after long absence from elsewhere back home in his youth there;
so he took loving care of me, with his sons renowned beside him.
Yet of Odysseus steadfast in heart he declared that never
had he heard any word, whether living or dead, from earth’s people.
But onward he sent me to Atreus’ son, to Menelaus spear-famed,
with horses to draw me, and with a close-jointed chariot also.
There I saw Argive Helen, because of whom many in hardship
Argives and Trojans alike had suffered, by will of the immortals.
Straightway then Menelaus, good in the battle-cry, questioned me,
asking for what need I had come to glorious Lacedaemon.
And I told him in turn the whole truth exactly and fully.
Then he answered me back, and spoke to me in these winged words:
“Out upon them, that they should desire to lie in the bed of
such a strong-hearted man, being themselves but weaklings and cowards.
As when amid a thicket the hind of a powerful lion
lays down her tender young fawns, newborn and still needing milk there,
then goes to graze over mountain-spurs and grassy hollows,
but he comes back again to the bed that is his in the thicket
and upon both alike lets loose an unspeakably shameful destruction,
so will Odysseus on them let loose an unspeakably shameful destruction.
If only, Father Zeus and Athena and lord Apollo,
he were the man he once was in well-built Lesbos among men,
when he rose at the challenge and wrestled with Philomeleides,
and threw him down with great force, and all of the Achaeans rejoiced there,
being such then, if Odysseus might mix with the suitors among them,
all of them soon would become short-lived and their marriages bitter.
Now as for all that you ask me and earnestly beg me to tell you,
I shall not speak beside the mark, nor turn you aside, nor deceive you.
Whatever the truthful old man of the sea declared and told me,
not one word of that will I hide from you, nor keep it in secret.
He said that he saw him upon an island, afflicted with anguish,
in the halls of the nymph Calypso, who keeps him there by compulsion.
He cannot make his way to the land of his fathers and country;
for there are no well-oared ships there beside him, no comrades
who might convey him over the broad back of the sea on his journey.”
So spoke Atreus’ son, Menelaus, renowned for the ash-spear.
When these things had been finished, I journeyed homeward; the immortals
gave me a following wind, and quickly they sent me to homeland.”
So he spoke, and the word stirred the heart in the breast within her.
Then in their midst godlike Theoclymenus also addressed them:
“Honored lady, wife of Odysseus, son of Laertes,
truly he does not know it for certain; but listen now to my saying.
For I shall prophesy to you exactly, and I shall hide nothing.
Let Zeus now know it first among gods, and the table of guest-right,
and the hearth of blameless Odysseus, to which I have now come,
that surely Odysseus is already here in his fatherland’s country,
sitting or moving abroad, and learning of these evil actions;
he is here, and for all of the suitors he plants an evil destruction.
Such was the bird-sign I marked as I sat on the well-benched vessel,
sitting there I discerned it and cried it aloud to Telemachus.”
Then in her turn wise-minded Penelope answered him:
“Ah stranger, if only this word might be brought to fulfillment;
then you would quickly know both my affection and many gifts from me,
given by me, so any man who met you would call you blessed.”
Thus they were speaking such things in turn to one another.
But the suitors before the great hall of Odysseus
took their delight in the discus and in casting of javelins,
there on the level-paved court, where earlier too they were reckless.
But when now it was time for the evening meal, and the sheep came
in from the fields on all sides, and the men drove them, as always,
then among them Medon spoke; for he was the one of the heralds
who pleased them the most, and attended them there at the feasting:
“Young men, since now all of you have delighted your spirits with contests,
come to the house, so there we may make ready the supper;
for there is nothing worse in taking a meal at due season.”
So he spoke, and they rose up and went, obeying his saying.
But when they had come to the house that was nobly inhabited,
then they laid down their cloaks on the benches and chairs in the hall there,
and they slaughtered great sheep and the fattened and flourishing goats,
and they slaughtered rich swine and a heifer brought in from the cattle,
making the feast ready. Meanwhile from the country toward townward
noble Odysseus and the godlike swineherd were hastening.
Then the swineherd began the discourse, that captain of people:
“Stranger, since now indeed you are eager to go to the city
today, as my master commanded me—though for my own part
I would prefer you remained here as warden to guard the farm buildings;
but I respect him and fear him, lest afterward he should reproach me;
harsh indeed are the scoldings that come from the mouths of our masters.
But come now, let us go; for the day has advanced the most part,
and soon toward the evening I think it will turn to more bitter cold for you.”
Then resourceful Odysseus in answer addressed him and said:
“I know it, I understand; you command one who thinks on these matters.
But come, let us go; and do you lead onward the whole way before me.
Give me a staff as well, if somewhere you have one already cut,
for support, since you say that the road is not easy for foot-travel.”
So he spoke, and about his shoulders he slung the unsightly beggar’s pouch,
thick-patched and tattered, and on it a twisted cord served as shoulder-strap.
Then Eumaeus placed in his hand a staff that well pleased him.
So the two of them went; and the dogs and the herdsmen remained there
staying behind by the stead, while he led his master townward,
like to a beggar in misery, like to an aged man also,
leaning upon his staff; and sorry garments were wrapped on his body.
But when as they strode on their way down the rugged footpath
they were now near the town and came to the spring of the people,
well-built and fair in its flow, where the townsmen drew their water,
which Ithacus made, and Neritus, and also Polyctor,
and around it there stood a grove of water-fed poplar trees there,
circling it round on all sides, and the cold water streamed down beneath them
from high on the rock; and above was fashioned an altar
for the nymphs, where all wayfaring men would offer libation.
There the son of Dolius, Melanthius, came up and met them,
driving the goats that surpassed all the flocks of the goatherds,
meant as a meal for the suitors; and two herdsmen followed beside him.
Seeing the two, he reviled them and spoke and called each by name there,
speaking outrageous and shameful words; and he stirred up Odysseus’ spirit:
“Now then indeed the utterly base is leading the base one before him;
always the god brings like to like and joins each fellow to fellow.
Where are you taking this belly-slave, most miserable swineherd,
this troublesome beggar, this scavenger haunting the banquets,
one who by many doorposts will stand and rub both his shoulders,
begging for scraps, not asking for swords nor asking for cauldrons?
If you would give him to me to become the keeper of sheepfolds,
and to sweep out the pens and carry green fodder to young kids,
then perhaps by drinking whey he might put some flesh on his thigh there.
But since indeed he has learned only evil and worthless behaviors,
he will not choose to go near to work, but cringing through the city
wants by begging to feed his insatiable belly forever.
But I will tell you this, and the thing will indeed be accomplished:
if he comes to the house of godlike Odysseus,
many footstools around his head from the hands of men in the hall there
will scrape all his ribs as he is struck and flung through the dwelling.”
So he spoke, and in passing, in witlessness, kicked with his foot at
Odysseus’ hip; but he did not knock him away from the pathway.
He stood firm and secure; and Odysseus pondered within him
whether rushing upon him he should with the staff take his spirit,
or lifting him high by the middle should smash his head on the earth there.
But he endured and held himself in with the strength of his spirit.
Then the swineherd, seeing him there, rebuked him and prayed with hands lifted:
“Nymphs of the spring, daughters of Zeus, if ever Odysseus
burned for you thigh-pieces, swathed over thickly with glistening fat there,
out of young lambs and kids, then grant me this prayer that I long for,
so that the man himself may return, and a god lead him homeward;
then he would scatter all of your splendors and swagger to nothing,
all that you flaunt in your insolence now as you wander forever
all through the town; and the flocks are destroyed by the wickedly faithless men.”
Then in reply spoke Melanthius, goatherd and master of she-goats:
“Dear me, what a thing the dog said, full of ruinous cunning!
Him on a black ship fitted with benches one day I shall carry
far away out of Ithaca, so he may earn me rich profit.
If only Apollo the archer with silver bow would strike Telemachus
down in the hall this day, or the suitors subdue and destroy him,
just as Odysseus has lost far away his day of returning.”
So he spoke, and he left them there as they slowly kept coming;
but he himself strode on, and swiftly he came to his master's dwelling.
Straightway he went inside, and sat down among all the suitors,
facing Eurymachus there, for he loved him most among all men.
Those who were serving set down by his side his portion of meat there,
and the revered housekeeper brought him bread and set it beside him
there for his eating. Then close by came noble Odysseus
and the divine swineherd and halted; around them there drifted
out the sound of the hollowed lyre, for Phemius started his singing.
Then Odysseus, taking the swineherd's hand, addressed him and said thus:
“Eumaeus, surely these are the beautiful halls of Odysseus,
easy indeed to distinguish and know when seen among many.
One part joins on to another, and all of the court has been finished
there with a wall and coping; the well-made doors are double;
no man alive could lightly break through and plunder the place here.
I can tell that within it a great host of men are feasting,
since the smell of roast meat mounts up, and the lyre in the house sounds,
that lyre which the gods have ordained as companion of banquets.”
Then in reply you spoke, Eumaeus, swineherd and loyal:
“You marked it with ease, since in other things too you are not witless.
Come then, let us consider how all of this business shall happen.
Either you go in first to the well-inhabited dwelling,
slipping among the suitors, while I remain here behind you;
or if you wish it, stay here, and I shall go onward before you.
Only do not delay very long, lest someone should see you
standing outside and should strike you or pelt you; on this I advise you.”
Then much-enduring noble Odysseus answered him, saying:
“I know it, I understand; you are urging a man who has thought it.
You go onward before me, and I shall remain here behind you.
I am not inexperienced in blows and in things men throw at me;
steadfast is the heart in me, since I have suffered so many
sorrows in waves and in war; let this too come after the others.
Yet there is no concealing the greedy insatiable belly,
cursed thing, which gives many troubles and evils to mortals;
because of it even the ships with good benches are fitted
out on the barren sea, bringing ruin and harm to opponents.”
So the two of them spoke such things to each other together.
Then a dog lying there raised up his head and his ears in attention,
Argus, the dog of long-suffering great-hearted King Odysseus,
whom once he himself had reared, but enjoyed him not, since before that
off he had gone to sacred Ilios. In the old days the young men
used to lead him to hunt wild goats and deer and the hares there.
Now he lay cast aside, with his master away and departed,
on a great heap of dung that was poured there before the outer doors, from
mules and from cattle in plenty, until the servants of Odysseus
carried it off to manure the broad field of their absent master.
There lay Argus the dog, all covered with swarming dog-ticks.
Then, when he noticed Odysseus standing there near him at last, he
wagged his tail and flattened both ears, but no longer had power
now to come any nearer and reach his own master before him.
But Odysseus, turning away, wiped off a tear that had risen,
easily hiding it from Eumaeus, and asked him a question:
“Eumaeus, this is a wonder indeed, this dog on the dung-heap.
Fine is the shape of his body, though this much I cannot determine,
whether he also was swift in his running, to match that appearance,
or was merely the sort of dogs that attend at men's tables,
such as their masters keep and take care of for ornament only.”
Then in reply you spoke, Eumaeus, swineherd and loyal:
“This is indeed the dog of a man who died far from his homeland.
If he were still such in his build and in all of his actions
as when Odysseus, departing to Troy, went away and left him,
quickly you would marvel to see his speed and his great strength.
Never did any beast that he chased in the deep of the woodland
get away from him; he was skillful beyond all others in tracking.
But now he is gripped by misery; and his lord in a foreign land perished,
far from his home, and the heedless women do not care for him.
Slaves, when no longer their masters maintain and uphold their dominion,
no longer then are they willing to labor as duty commands them.
Zeus of the thunderous voice takes away one half of the valor
out of a man, on the day when the yoke of his slavery takes him.”
So he spoke, and entered the house where people were dwelling in comfort,
and he went straight through the hall to the midst of the splendid suitors.
Then for Argus the fate of black death came over and seized him,
just when at last he had looked on Odysseus, now in the twentieth year.
Him then first of them all godlike Telemachus noticed,
seeing the swineherd come down through the house, and quickly thereafter
nodded and called him near; and he, glancing around him, took up a footstool
lying there, where the carver of meat used to sit in the banquet,
sharing out many portions of flesh to the suitors who feasted through the household.
This he carried and set by the table of young Telemachus,
facing it; and there he himself sat down. Then the herald
took up a portion and placed it before him, lifting bread from the basket.
Close behind him after that entered Odysseus the hero,
like to a beggar, a miserable old man and a graybeard,
leaning upon his staff; and foul clothes covered his body.
Then he sat on the threshold of ash wood, inside the doorway,
leaning against a cypress post, which long ago some craftsman
smoothed with skill in his work and had made it straight by the line-rule.
Then Telemachus called the swineherd close to him and addressed him,
taking a whole loaf out of the finely woven basket,
and some meat, as much as both of his hands could hold when he cupped them:
“Carry these things to the stranger, and tell him also
he should go among all of the suitors and beg from each one there;
shame is no help to a man when need has fallen upon him.”
So he spoke, and the swineherd went when he had heard that order,
and standing close beside him he spoke out winged words in answer:
“Telemachus gives you these, stranger, and bids you also
go among all of the suitors and beg from each one there;
shame, he says, is no good thing for a man who must live by his begging.”
Then resourceful Odysseus in turn made answer and said to him:
“Father Zeus, grant that Telemachus may be prosperous among men,
and may all come to pass that his heart in its longing desires for.”
So he spoke, and received them with both of his hands, and he set them
there before both his feet, on top of his tattered beggar’s wallet,
and he ate while the singer in that great hall was singing his measure.
But when he had finished his meal, then the noble singer fell silent.
Then the suitors made an uproar all through the hall; and Athena,
standing close by the side of Odysseus, Laertes’ offspring,
urged him on, so that he might collect broken crusts from the suitors
and might learn which men among them were righteous and which were unrighteous.
Yet not even so was she minded to ward off ruin from any.
Then he set out to beg, going rightward from man unto man there,
stretching his hand out everywhere, as though he had begged all his lifetime.
They in pity gave to him, and they marveled greatly to see him,
asking each other who he might be and from where he had come there.
Then among them Melanthius the goatherd spoke out and addressed them:
“Listen to me, you suitors who court our queen of great glory,
speaking of this stranger; for certainly I have seen him already.
Truly the swineherd was the one who conducted him hither;
but the man’s own stock I do not clearly know, where he claims it.”
So he spoke, and Antinous with harsh words rebuked the swineherd:
“You notorious swineherd, why was it you brought this fellow
here to the town? Do we not have enough other wandering beggars,
nuisances, miserable men who lick clean the leavings of banquets?
Is it a little thing in your eyes that they squander your master’s
livelihood here as they gather, and now you have invited this one too?”
Then you answered him, Eumaeus, swineherd faithful and noble:
“Antinous, though you are high-born, these are not words finely spoken.
For who ever goes out of his own accord and invites in a stranger,
one from abroad, unless he is one of the craftsmen who serve all:
some seer, or healer of sickness, or builder in timber,
or even a god-taught singer, whose song can delight those who hear him?
Such men indeed are invited over the boundless earth of mortals;
but no man would ask in a beggar to eat up his substance.
You are ever the harshest of all of the suitors assembled
toward the slaves of Odysseus, and especially harsh upon me; but I care not,
so long as prudent Penelope still lives here in the palace,
and so long as godlike Telemachus lives here beside her.”
Then sagacious Telemachus answered him face-to-face, saying:
“Be quiet; do not answer this fellow at length with your speeches.
Antinous always delights in provoking men viciously,
using hard words, and he even urges the others to do it.”
So he spoke, and then to Antinous he addressed winged words:
“Antinous, how nobly you care for me, just as a father
cares for his son, when you order me now to drive from my hall this
stranger by force of command; may a god never bring that to fulfillment.
Give to him, take it yourself; I do not begrudge it, I tell you.
So do not trouble my mother with this, nor trouble another
of the thralls in the halls of godlike Odysseus.
No, for that is not the intent that lives in your bosom;
rather you wish to eat it yourself than to give to another.”
Then in return Antinous answered him, saying:
“Telemachus, lofty in speech, ungovernable spirit, what said you?
If all of the suitors should offer him just so much bounty,
then for three months more this house might keep him far from its doorway.”
So he spoke, and lifting the footstool from under the table,
showed the one where he rested his shining feet at the banquet.
But all the rest gave too, and they filled up the beggar’s pouch there
full of bread and of meat; and now Odysseus was likely
back at the threshold to go and taste of Achaean almsgiving.
But he stopped beside Antinous, and spoke to him, saying:
“Give, my friend; you do not seem to me the worst of the Achaeans,
but the best; for truly you have the look of a ruler.
Therefore it is your part to give still more than the others
bread; and I in return will praise you over the broad earth.
For I too once dwelt in a house among men in abundance,
rich and prosperous, and often I gave to a wanderer,
whatever man he might be and whatever need had brought him.
Very many servants I had, and many possessions besides them,
all by which men live well and are called wealthy among people.
But Zeus son of Cronos destroyed it all, for surely he wished it,
he who sent me along with roving freebooting shipmen
on the long road to Egypt, that there I might perish.
There in the stream of Egypt I halted my curving ships there.
Then indeed I commanded my trusty companions in earnest
there by the ships to remain and to guard the beached vessels,
and I urged men to go as lookouts up to the watchpoints.
But they, yielding to outrage, and following their own force,
quickly began to ravage the beautiful fields of Egyptians;
women they carried away, and little children beside them,
and they slaughtered the men; and swiftly the cry reached the city.
They, hearing the shouting, came on with the dawn as it brightened;
all of the plain was filled with footmen and horses together,
and with the flash of bronze; and Zeus who delights in the thunder
cast foul panic among my companions, nor did any man dare
stand and face them in battle; for evils stood round us on all sides.
There many of us they killed with the edge of the bronze weapon,
and others they led away alive, to labor in bondage.
But me they handed to Cyprus, to one who met them there as a guest-friend,
Dmetor the son of Iasus, who ruled mightily in Cyprus.
From there I have now come here, enduring affliction.”
Then in return Antinous answered and shouted at him:
“What god has brought this pest to us, this nuisance at dinner?
Stand there in the middle, away from my table’s presence,
lest soon you come to a bitter Egypt and bitter Cyprus.
Such a bold and shameless beggar as you are before us!
One after another you stand beside all men, and they give you
lavishly, since there is no restraint and no scruple at all in
giving away what is other men’s, when plenty lies by each person.”
Then withdrawing, resourceful Odysseus spoke to him, saying:
“Ah me, then beauty and sense do not dwell together in you.
You would not give from your own house even salt to your suppliant,
you who now, seated here among goods that belong to another,
could not bring yourself to give me some bread, though so much lies before you.”
So he spoke, and Antinous grew still more angry in spirit;
glaring beneath his brows, he addressed him with winged words:
“Now I no longer suppose you will go from the hall here
back in good fashion, since now you have dared to utter insults.”
So he spoke, and lifting the footstool he struck his right shoulder,
low on the back by the spine; but he stood there fixed like a boulder,
steadfast, nor did the missile of proud Antinous shake him;
silently only he moved his head, deep plotting of evils.
Then back to the threshold he went and sat down, and beside him
set the well-filled pouch, and spoke out among the suitors:
“Hear me, you suitors of our far-famed queen and princess,
so I may speak what the heart in my breast bids me utter.
There is no pain in the mind, nor any grief worth mentioning,
when a man is struck while he fights for his own possessions,
whether for cattle or else for his white-fleeced sheep in the pasture.
But Antinous struck me because of my wretched belly,
ruinous thing, which gives so many sorrows to mortals.
Yet if indeed there are gods and avenging Furies for beggars,
may death overtake Antinous before he comes to his marriage.”
Then in return Antinous, Eupeithes’ son, answered him:
“Sit there in silence and eat, stranger, or else go elsewhere,
lest for such words as these the young men drag you through the hallways,
either by foot or by hand, and tear all the flesh from your body.”
So he spoke, and the rest were all deeply indignant against him.
Thus would a man among those overweening young suitors say:
“Antinous, that was not fair, to strike the poor wandering beggar,
reckless man, if perhaps indeed he is one of the gods from the heavens.
Even the gods, in the likeness of strangers from alien countries,
taking all kinds of forms, keep passing through cities of mortals,
watching the lawless violence there, and the good rule of people.”
So spoke the suitors; but he gave no heed at all to their saying.
But in his heart Telemachus fostered a mighty sorrow
for the blow; yet he did not let one tear fall down from his eyelids,
but in silence he shook his head, while pondering evils in darkness.
But when circumspect Penelope heard of the stranger’s affliction,
how he had been struck in the hall, then she said to her women:
“May famed Apollo the archer so strike you yourself, Antinous.”
Then the housekeeper Eurynome answered and spoke in response there:
“If only our prayers might come to fulfilment and ending,
none of these men would come to the fair-throned Dawn in the morning.”
Then circumspect Penelope answered and spoke to her again:
“Nurse, they are enemies all, since all of them scheme us destruction;
but Antinous most of all is like to black death in his spirit.
Some poor unhappy stranger goes wandering through the great house here,
begging from man after man, for hard need drives him onward;
all the others filled his wallet and each one gave him something,
but he with a footstool struck the base of the man’s right shoulder.”
Thus she spoke among all her serving women there in the chamber,
seated within; meanwhile noble Odysseus was eating his supper.
Then calling the noble swineherd to stand by, she spoke to him saying:
“Go now, noble Eumaeus, and bid the stranger come upward
here, so that I may address him and ask him some questions,
whether he has heard of stout-hearted Odysseus anywhere,
or saw him with his own eyes; he seems like one long storm-driven.”
Then answering her, you spoke, Eumaeus, swineherd and good man:
“If only, my queen, the Achaeans would keep themselves silent,
then what he tells would surely enchant your own dear spirit.
For three nights I had him with me, and three days I detained him
there in my hut, for he first came to me after fleeing a vessel.
Yet still he has not brought to an end all the woes he recounts there.
As when a man gazes entranced at a singer before him,
one who by gift of the gods has learned songs full of longing for mortals,
and men insatiably yearn to keep hearing, whenever he sings them,
so that man there enthralled me as he sat in my dwelling and told me.
He declares that he is a guest-friend linked to Odysseus’ father,
living in Crete, where the lineage and house of Minos are rooted.
Thence indeed he has now come here, after suffering many afflictions,
rolled and driven from place to place; and he says he has heard tell
that Odysseus is near, in the rich land of the Thesprotian people,
living, and bringing much treasure along with him home to this household.”
Then circumspect Penelope answered and spoke to him again:
“Go then, call him here, so he himself may tell me the story.
As for these men, let them sit at the doors and amuse themselves,
or else here through the house, since the heart in them is lighthearted.
Their own possessions lie there in their homes all unharmed and unravaged,
grain and sweet wine; their own house-servants consume these things there,
while they keep swarming daily into our house here without ceasing,
slaughtering cattle and sheep and the fat well-fattened she-goats,
feasting and drinking the flashing wine in extravagant folly.
Wastefully so, and much of our substance is all disappearing,
since there is no man such as Odysseus was, to defend this household.
But if Odysseus should come and attain to his fatherland’s country,
then with his son he would swiftly repay these men for their outrage.”
So she spoke, and Telemachus gave a great sneeze, and around him
terribly all the house rang out; and Penelope laughed then,
and quickly she spoke winged words to Eumaeus and addressed him:
“Go now for me, and summon the stranger to stand here before me.
Do you not see how my son has just sneezed upon all my saying?
Therefore the death of the suitors will not be left unaccomplished,
every one of them all; not one shall escape death and destruction.
And I will tell you something besides; do you store it within you:
if I perceive that he tells me the truth in all things exactly,
I will clothe him in cloak and tunic, fine garments to wear there.”
Thus she spoke, and the swineherd departed when he heard her commandment,
and standing near at his side he addressed him in winged words, saying:
“Stranger, old father, circumspect Penelope summons you inward,
mother of Telemachus; her heart bids her ask you some questions
about her husband, though she herself is afflicted with sorrows.
And if she finds that all you tell her is wholly truthful,
she will clothe you in cloak and tunic, which things above all things
you are in need of; but food you may beg through the people
and so sustain your belly; whoever is willing will give it.”
Then much-enduring noble Odysseus answered and said to him:
“Eumaeus, I could at once tell all things truly and clearly
to the daughter of Icarius, wary-minded Penelope;
for I know that man well; we have both borne one common affliction.
But I fear the throng of these bitter and violent suitors,
whose outrage and brutal force rise up to the iron heaven.
Even just now, when that man, as I passed through the chamber,
struck me and gave me pain, though I had done no harm whatever,
neither Telemachus checked him in that, nor any other.
Therefore bid Penelope stay within the halls and wait there,
though she is eager, until the time when the sun has gone under;
then let her ask me concerning her husband’s day of returning,
seating me nearer the fire; for the clothing upon me
is wretched; you know it yourself, since first I entreated you.”
So he spoke, and the swineherd went when he had heard the saying.
But when he had stepped past the threshold, Penelope called to him:
“You do not bring him, Eumaeus. What has the wanderer minded?
Has he perhaps taken fear of someone outrageous, or otherwise
feels shame here in the house? Yet a shamefaced beggar is worthless.”
Then in reply you answered her, Eumaeus the swineherd:
“What he has said is fitting, as any man else also
would think, while he seeks to avoid the outrage of haughty men.
He bids you remain till the time when the sun has gone under.
And for you also yourself it is better by far, my queen, thus:
to speak to the stranger alone, and alone to hear his answer.”
Then the wise-hearted Penelope answered him, saying:
“The stranger is no fool; he surmises how matters may happen.
For I think there are not such men among mortal people,
men so insolent, plotting deeds so reckless and wicked.”
So she spoke thus; and the noble swineherd then went on his way there
into the throng of the suitors, when all had been told and made clear.
Then at once he spoke winged words to Telemachus softly,
leaning his head in close, so the others might not overhear him:
“Dear friend, I am going away, to guard the swine and the matters
there, your livelihood and my own; let all here be your concern now.
First keep watch over yourself and preserve your own person;
see that nothing befalls you; for many Achaeans are plotting
evil; may Zeus destroy them before they bring ruin upon us.”
Then resourceful Telemachus answered him in return:
“It shall be so, old father; but go when you have supped at evening.
Then at dawn come again, and bring noble victims for slaughter;
all the rest shall be cared for by me and the deathless immortals.”
So he spoke, and the other sat down again on the polished seat there,
and when he had filled up his heart with eating and drinking,
he went on his way to the swine, and left the enclosure and hall there,
full of the banqueters; they were delighting in dance and in singing,
for now at last the day had already declined into evening.
