The Odyssey — Book XXIII

The bed; the test that Penelope wins; the long night held back.

Then the old woman ran to the upper room with laughter about her,
going to tell her mistress her own dear husband was inside there.
Fast beat her knees in haste, and her feet kept stumbling beneath her.
Then she stood at her head and addressed her, speaking a word there:
“Wake, Penelope, wake now, dear child, so that you may witness
with your own eyes the thing you have longed for all your days to see now.
Here is Odysseus, come back home to his house, though he came late.
And he has killed the haughty suitors, those men who in his household
wrought him affliction and ate his wealth and oppressed his son there.”
Then in return the circumspect Penelope answered:
“Dear nurse, the gods have made you mad, they who are able
even to make a very wise mind foolish and witless,
and can endow a thoughtless one with a share of good judgment.
They have unhinged your mind; before, your senses were steady.
Why do you mock me, when I carry a heart full of sorrows,
telling me these wild things, and waking me up from my slumber,
sweet sleep, that closed all around my dear eyelids and bound them?
Never until now have I slept so deeply as on this occasion,
since Odysseus went away to see that evil-named Ilion.
Come now, go down again and return to the hall of the house there.
If any other among all the women that wait in my household
came and told me these things and awakened me out of my slumber,
I would have sent her quickly away with harshness, back to the hall there,
but in your case your old age will be your profit in this matter.”
Then in return the dear nurse Eurycleia answered:
“Child, I am not mocking you, dear one; in very truth now
here is Odysseus, come back home to his house, as I tell you,
that very stranger whom all men dishonored here in the palace.
Long since Telemachus had known that he was here in the household,
but in his prudence he kept concealed his father’s intentions,
so that he might exact punishment for the force of those proud men.”
So she spoke, and she rejoiced, and sprang from the bed in her gladness,
clasped the old woman around, and tears came down from her eyelids.
Then lifting her voice she addressed her with winged words, saying:
“Come then, dear nurse, tell me this truly and with no falsehood:
if in very truth he has come to the house, as you are saying,
how did he ever lay hands on the shameless suitors and master them,
being alone by himself, while they were forever assembled within there?”
Then in return the dear nurse Eurycleia answered:
“I did not see it, nor did I learn it; I only heard groaning
from the men being killed; while we in the innermost chamber
sat there confounded, and the close-fitted doors held firmly.
Not until then did your son call me out from the hall of the house there,
Telemachus; for his father had sent him ahead to call me.
Then I found Odysseus standing among the bodies of the slaughtered;
and they about him, holding the beaten hard floor all around him,
lay there piled on one another; your heart would have softened to see it.
Now they all in a mass are lying beside the courtyard doorways,
while he is purifying the beautiful house all around there,
having kindled a great fire; and he sent me to call you.
Come now and follow, so joy may come over the dear heart of both of you,
since very many afflictions and evils have both of you suffered.
Now at long last this ancient desire has reached its fulfillment.
He himself has come living to his own hearth and dwelling,
and he has found both you and his son still here in the household;
and the suitors who worked him harm he punished, all of them, in his house there.”
Then in return the circumspect Penelope answered:
“Dear nurse, do not yet exalt too greatly in laughter and triumph.
You know how welcome his appearing would be in these chambers
to all, and most of all to me and the son we begot together.
But this tale you tell is not in truth exactly as spoken;
rather some one of the immortals killed the glorious suitors,
angered by their spirit-grieving outrage and evil actions.
For they respected no one at all of the earth-dwelling mortals,
neither the bad man nor yet the good, whoever approached them.
Therefore through their own recklessness they have suffered. But Odysseus
lost his homecoming far from the land of Achaea, and perished.”
Then in return the dear nurse Eurycleia answered:
“My child, what sort of word has escaped through the fence of your teeth there,
that, though your husband is here by the hearth in the house, you declare
he will not come back home? Your heart is forever distrustful.
Come then, I will tell you another clear sign for your knowing:
the scar that long ago a boar drove in him with his white tusk there.
Washing him, I observed it, and I wished to tell you of it,
you yourself; but he took hold and laid his hands on my mouth there,
and would not let me tell it, for his mind is full of all cunning.
But come now and follow; and I will lay down my life as the wager:
if I am deceiving you, kill me with the most pitiful ruin.”
Then in return the circumspect Penelope answered:
“Dear nurse, it is hard for you to discern the designs of the gods there,
to draw them forth, though indeed you are very wise in your thinking.
Still, even so, let us go to my son, so that I may behold
these suitors lying dead, and the man who has slaughtered them.”
So she spoke and came down from her upper chamber; and deeply her spirit
wavered, whether apart she should question her dear lord and husband,
or should go and stand by and kiss his head and his hands as she held them.
But when she had entered and passed over the threshold of stone there,
then she sat down facing Odysseus, there in the glow of the firelight,
close by the opposite wall; and he by the tall pillar's side there
sat with his eyes to the ground, still waiting to hear whether something
his noble wife would say to him, now that her eyes had beheld him.
Long she sat there in silence, and wonder came over her spirit;
sometimes she looked straight on him and knew him there by his features,
sometimes she failed to perceive him, because of the vile clothes upon him.
Then Telemachus scolded her, and spoke, and called to her plainly:
“Mother of mine, hard mother, with pitiless heart in your bosom,
why do you keep so apart from my father, and why do you never
sit yourself near him and ask him questions and search out the matter?
Surely no other woman with heart that endured would have held back
thus from her husband, if he after suffering many afflictions
came in the twentieth year to the land of his fathers and homeland.
But in your breast your heart is always more stubborn than stone is.”
Then resourceful Penelope answered and said to him in reply:
“Child of mine, in my breast my spirit is struck into wonder;
I cannot say any word to him, I cannot ask him a question,
nor can I look in his eyes and face him. But if in truth now
this is Odysseus and he has come to his home, then more surely
we shall know one another, and better; for tokens are with us,
signs that are hidden from others, which only we two have knowledge of.”
So she spoke, and the great-souled, long-enduring Odysseus smiled then,
and at once to Telemachus spoke these winged words in answer:
“Telemachus, let your mother within these halls make her trial
of me; soon enough she will know me more surely and better.
Now because I am foul, and I have mean garments around me,
therefore she slights me, and still she does not admit I am that man.
But let us consider ourselves how this matter may turn out best now.
Even when one man has killed a single man in the country,
one who has not many others behind him to aid and avenge him,
still he goes into exile, leaving his kinsmen and homeland.
But we have killed the mainstay of all the city, the noblest
youths in Ithaca. On this I bid you to turn your mind fully.”
Then in answer to him spoke forth prudent Telemachus wisely:
“Look to these things yourself, dear father; for men say your counsel
is the best among mortals, and no man born for dying
could contend against you in wisdom, nor strive there beside you.
We for our part will follow with zeal, and I do not think ever
we shall be lacking in courage, so far as our power extends here.”
Then in turn the much-counseling Odysseus answered and told him:
“Therefore I shall declare what seems to me to be the best way.
First of all, you must bathe and put tunics on your bodies,
and command the serving women within these halls to dress also.
Then let the godlike singer, with clear-toned lyre in his hands there,
lead us on in the measures of dancing that gladdens the spirit,
so that whoever may hear it outside will suppose it a wedding,
whether some passer-by on the road, or a neighbor about us.
Let not the wide report of the slaughter of all these suitors
spread through the town before we have gone from here and departed
out to our farm in the fields, rich-grown with trees; and thereafter
we shall consider what gain Olympian Zeus may provide us.”
So he spoke, and they heard him with care, and obeyed what he told them.
First of all they bathed, and clothed themselves in their tunics;
then the women dressed; and the godlike singer took up
into his hands the carved lyre, and stirred in them all the desire there
for sweet song and for dancing in blameless joy and delightfulness.
All around them the great hall echoed aloud to the footsteps
of men making merry, and women fair-girdled in dancing.
Thus would someone say, hearing the sound from outside of the dwelling:
“Surely at last someone now has wedded the queen much courted.
Cruel woman, she had not the heart to keep safe the great household
of her own lawful husband until he returned there in person.”
Thus a man would say, for they did not know how matters had happened.
Meanwhile within his own house great-hearted Odysseus was tended:
Eurynome the housekeeper bathed him and rubbed him with olive,
and about him she cast a fair cloak and a tunic beside it.
Then Athena poured beauty abundantly down from his head there,
making him taller to look on and fuller; and down from his head she
sent curling locks to flow, like the bloom of the hyacinth flower.
As when a man overlays silver with gold, one well skilled there,
whom Hephaestus and Pallas Athena have taught in all craftsman’s
art, and he brings to completion his work with grace and with beauty,
So she poured grace and beauty around on his head and his shoulders.
Out of the bath he stepped, in form like the deathless immortals;
then once again he sat on the chair from which he had risen,
facing his wife, and spoke and addressed her directly in words:
“Strange woman, surely to you beyond all the daughters of women
they who possess Olympian halls have given an iron heart there.
No other woman would ever have held herself off in her spirit
thus from her husband, who, bearing so many afflictions and hardships,
came in the twentieth year to the land of his fathers and homeland.
Come then, dear nurse, make ready my bed, so that I as well now
may lie down by myself, for the heart in her breast is of iron.”
Then resourceful Penelope answered him, prudent in spirit:
“Strange man, I am not exalting myself, nor slighting your person,
nor am I over-amazed; I know very well what you looked like
when you set out from Ithaca there on the long-oared sea-vessel.
Come then, Eurycleia, prepare for him the close-jointed bedstead
outside the strong-built chamber, the chamber that he himself fashioned.
Set out there for him the close-jointed bed, and upon it cast bedding,
fleeces and mantles and rugs that gleam with their polished brightness.”
So then she spoke, while testing her husband; and great Odysseus,
stung into anger, spoke to his wife who knew good and faithful counsel:
“Woman, indeed you have spoken a word that pains my heart deeply.
Who has set my bed in another place? Hard would the labor
be, even for one well skilled, unless some god should come to it
and, with ease if he wished, set it down in a different station.
None of mankind that lives, no mortal man, not even in prime strength,
could with ease shift it away; for a notable sign has been fashioned
in that well-crafted bed, and I wrought it, no one beside me.
There was a long-leaved olive tree growing inside the enclosure,
flourishing still in its prime, and its trunk was thick as a pillar.
Round it I built our chamber and labored until I had finished,
using close-fitted stones, and I roofed it well high above us,
and I set on the doors, fitted close, with panels compacted together.
Then after that I lopped off the crown of the long-leaved olive,
and from the root upward I trimmed and planed the trunk with the bronze there
well and with careful skill, and I brought it straight by the line-rule,
shaping a bedpost from it, and I bored it all through with the auger.
Starting from this I shaped out the bed, till I brought it to finish,
decorating it over with gold and with silver and ivory;
then I stretched out upon it a strap of oxhide, bright crimson.
Thus I reveal to you this sign; yet I do not know in my spirit,
woman, whether my bed is still fixed and steadfast, or whether
some man has moved it elsewhere, by cutting the olive beneath it.”
So he spoke, and her knees were unstrung, and her dear heart within her,
as she knew the sure signs that Odysseus had told and made clear there;
then, bursting in tears, she ran straight toward him, and with both arms
clasped the neck of Odysseus, kissed his head, and then told him:
“Do not be angry with me, Odysseus, since in all matters
you were the wisest of men; but the gods assigned us affliction,
gods who begrudged that we, abiding beside one another,
should rejoice in our youth and arrive at the threshold of old age.
Yet do not now be vexed with me for this, nor hold it against me,
because when first I saw you I did not embrace you so fondly.
Always my heart in the breast that is mine kept trembling within me,
lest some mortal man should come and deceive me by speaking;
for there are many who plot for themselves base profits and evil.
Not even Argive Helen, the daughter begotten by Zeus there,
would have mingled in love and in bed with a man from a strange land,
had she known that the warlike sons of the Achaeans after
all would bring her back to her home and her dear native country.
It was a god who impelled her to do that shameful action;
nor before then did she lay in her heart that ruinous blindness,
from which there came to us too the grief that first overtook us.
But now, since you have recounted the signs most clear and unmistakable
of our bed, which no other mortal had ever beheld there,
save only you and I, and one lone handmaid beside us,
Actoris, whom my father once gave me when first I came here,
she who would guard for us both the doors of our close-built chamber,
now you persuade my heart, though stubborn and hard it has been there.”
So then she spoke, and in him she roused still stronger desire for weeping;
and he wept as he held in his arms his dear wise-hearted lady.
As when the land appears most welcome to men who are swimming,
those whose stout-built ship Poseidon has shattered at sea there,
driving it on with the wind and the towering blast of the billows;
few escape from the gray sea and swim till they come to the mainland,
and much salt scurf is caked on their skin from the wash of the brine there;
gladly they set foot then upon land, having fled their destruction:
so to her gaze her husband was welcome as she looked upon him,
nor yet from around his neck did she wholly let go her white forearms.
And now on their weeping would Dawn have appeared with rose-red fingers,
had not the goddess grey-eyed Athena conceived one thing further.
At the world's rim she held back the long night, and Dawn in her turn she
stayed by the stream of Ocean, gold-throned, nor let her harness
her swift-foot horses that carry the light of day to men,
Lampos and Phaethon, the colts that draw in the Dawn light.
Then to his wife spoke resourceful Odysseus in answer:
“Wife, we have not yet come to the end of all our trials,
but still there lies before us labor beyond all measure,
great and grievous, and all of it I must bring to completion.
So did the spirit of Teiresias prophesy to me
on that day when I went down within the house of Hades,
seeking the homecoming there for my comrades and for myself.
But come now, wife, let us go to our bed, so that already
laid in sweet sleep's arms we may take our delight in slumber.”
Then in return to him prudent Penelope answered:
“Surely your bed will be ready whenever your own heart
wishes it, since indeed the gods have made you return here
to your well-builded house and the land of your fathers.
But since you have spoken, and a god has cast in your spirit
this, come, tell me the trial; for later also, I think,
I shall learn it, and to know it at once is nothing the worse.”
Then in return to her spoke resourceful Odysseus:
“Strange woman, why now are you urging and pressing me so much
to tell it? Yet I shall speak and hide nothing from you.
Truly your heart will not take any joy in it; for not even
I rejoice, since he ordered me still to go among many
towns of men, with a shapely oar held fast in my hands,
until at last I come where there are men who know nothing
of the sea, and never eat food that is mixed up with salt.
Neither indeed do they know of the ships with cheeks painted red,
nor of the shapely oars that are wings to the ships upon water.
And he declared to me this unmistakable sign, nor will I
hide it from you: when another wayfaring man meets me
and says that upon my bright shoulder I carry a winnow,
then there he ordered me, planting the oar in the earth, to
offer fair sacrifices to lord Poseidon the ruler,
ram and bull, and a boar that mounts on the backs of the sows then,
then to go homeward again, and offer sacred hecatombs
to the immortal gods who possess the broad heaven above us,
all in due order. And death out of the sea for myself too
shall come, most gentle indeed, such a death as will slay me
when I am worn by sleek old age; and the people around me
shall be prosperous. All these things he declared will be fulfilled.”
Then in return to him prudent Penelope answered:
“If indeed the gods will accomplish a better old age for you,
then there is hope that after our evils escape will be given.”
So then they spoke such things in speech to one another.
Meanwhile Eurynome and the nurse were preparing the bedstead
with soft woven cloths, while bright torches flared in the chamber.
But when they had spread the firm bedstead, working in haste there,
the old woman turned and went back to the house to lie down;
and for the two Eurynome, attendant within the bedchamber,
guided them onward in going to bed, with a torch in her hands.
Then when she had led them into the chamber she turned back from them.
They then gladly approached the old law of their marriage bed.
And then Telemachus and the keeper of cattle and swineherd
rested their feet from the dancing, and made the women stop also,
and themselves lay down to sleep through the shadowy hallways.
But when the two had taken their fill of the lovely love union,
then they delighted in speech, and spoke to each other in turn there:
she told what things in the halls she had borne, noble lady,
watching the deadly throng of the suitor men in the palace,
who for her sake had slaughtered so many cattle and fat sheep,
and much wine had been drawn from the jars and poured out in plenty.
And god-born Odysseus told of all the grief he had dealt men,
and all that he himself had suffered and toiled through in sorrow;
all he told, and she took delight as she listened, nor did sleep
fall on her eyelids before he had told the whole tale fully.
He began first with how he subdued the Cicones, and after
came to the rich tilled land of the Lotus-eating people,
and all that the Cyclops did, and how he exacted repayment
for his brave comrades, whom he devoured and never had pitied,
and how he came to Aeolus, who welcomed him freely
and sent him onward, yet still it was not his portion to reach
his own dear fatherland; but a stormwind seized him again and
bore him, heavily groaning, across the fish-filled deep sea.
And how he came to Telepylus, city of the Laestrygonians,
who destroyed his ships and his well-greaved comrades beside them,
all of them; but Odysseus alone slipped clear in the black ship.
And Circe's guile he recounted, and all her manifold cunning,
and how to the house of Hades, the moldering, down he had journeyed,
seeking the counsel there of the shade of Theban Teiresias,
in his many-benched ship, and beheld all the rest of his shipmates,
and his mother, who bore him and nursed him when he was a little one;
and how he heard the voice of the close-thronged song of the Sirens,
how he came to the Wandering Rocks and to dread Charybdis,
and to Scylla, whom never have men escaped from uninjured;
and how his comrades slaughtered the cattle of Helios;
and how Zeus of the high thunder struck at the swift ship
with his sooty bolt, and the brave companions around him
perished all in a mass, while he himself fled the evil fates from him;
how he came to Ogygia's isle and the nymph Calypso,
who detained him there, desiring that he should be her husband,
in her hollow caverns, and fed him, and always was promising
she would make him immortal and ageless for all of his lifetime;
but she could never persuade the heart in his breast within him;
and how after much suffering he came to the land of Phaeacians,
who truly honored him from the heart as if he were a god there,
and sent him forth in a ship to the land of his fathers and homeland,
giving bronze and gold in abundance, and garments as well there.
That then was the latest word he had spoken, when sweet sleep upon him,
loosener of limbs, came rushing and loosed the heart's cares within him.
But then again the gray-eyed goddess Athena considered
one further thing, when now in her heart she supposed that Odysseus
had taken his fill of the bed of his wife and likewise of slumber.
Straightway out of Ocean she roused the gold-throned early Dawn-goddess,
so she might bring light unto mortals; and up rose Odysseus
from the soft bed, and to his wife he spoke and enjoined her:
“Wife, by now of our many hard trials we both have had surfeit,
both of us: you here weeping for my care-burdened homecoming,
while upon me Zeus and the other gods with afflictions
held me and checked me far from the land of my fathers, though eager.
But now, since at last we both have attained our long-desired bed here,
all the possessions I have, you must tend them within these halls for me;
and the sheep that the proud suitors slaughtered and wasted for me,
many indeed I myself shall win back by foray and raiding,
and the Achaeans will give me the rest, till they fill every sheepfold.
But now to the field rich in trees I shall go on my journey,
so I may see my noble father, who sorely is grieving within him.
And on you, my wife, I lay this charge, though prudent you are fully:
straight with the sunrise the rumor will spread among men all together,
of the suitor-men whom I killed here within these halls of my household.
Go to the upper room and sit there with all your serving women;
look upon no one at all, and do not inquire and ask anything.”
So he spoke, and over his shoulders he put on the splendid armor,
and roused Telemachus, and the neat-herd, and also the swineherd,
and bade them all to take in their hands the weapons of battle.
They did not disobey him, but clothed themselves round in bronze armor,
opened the doors, and went on their way; and Odysseus led them.
Now already the light spread over the earth, but Athena
wrapped them in night and swiftly led them out of the city.
