The Odyssey — Book VII

The palace and gardens of Alcinous; Arete’s question.

Thus he prayed there, the much-enduring lordly Odysseus,
while the strength of the mules brought the maiden into the city.
Then, when she came to the glorious palace belonging to father,
there at the gate she halted, and round her stood all of her brothers,
men who resembled immortals; they loosened the mules from the wagon,
carrying all of the garments inside; but Nausicaa entered
into her room, where the fire was lit by the aged attendant,
Apeire-born Eurymedusa, who kept the young maiden's chamber.
Long before then, the hollow ships carried her out of Apeire,
chosen to be a reward of honor for lord Alcinous,
since he was king of the whole Phaeacian people, who heard him
speaking as though he were god. She had nursed white-armed Nausicaa
there in the palace; she kindled the fire and prepared the girl's supper.
Then great Odysseus rose and went to the city; Athena,
holding a kindly intention for him, poured mist all around him,
thickly, so none of the great-hearted men of Phaeacia, meeting,
taunted the stranger in speech and demanded to know who he might be.
Yet when Odysseus was just at the point of approaching the lovely
city, the gray-eyed goddess Athena came forward to meet him,
taking the form of a young unmarried girl with a pitcher.
Standing before him, she waited, and lord Odysseus addressed her:
“Child, will you guide me to find the house of a man who is known as
lord Alcinous, king who commands all the people around here?
I am a stranger who comes after suffering greatly, arriving
here from a faraway country; and none of the mortals I know here,
none of the people whose country and city surround me in this place.”
Then the gray-eyed goddess Athena addressed him in answer:
“Fatherly stranger, I shall show you the house you have asked me
now to reveal, for it stands near the house of my blameless father.
Only continue in silence this way, while I lead you onward;
look at no one among the inhabitants, asking no questions.
These men do not readily suffer the company of strangers,
nor do they welcome with love any man who arrives from another
country; instead, they rely on their rapidly traveling vessels,
crossing the mighty gulf, for the Earth-shaker gave them this power:
ships of surpassing swiftness, like wings or the thought of a mortal.”
Thus having spoken, the goddess Athena led swiftly before him,
while he continued behind, in the steps of divinity walking.
None of the ship-famed Phaeacians observed great Odysseus
moving along through the city among them, for Pallas Athena,
lovely-haired terrible goddess, would not permit them to see him,
pouring a marvelous mist all around him, with kind thought within her.
There great Odysseus marveled at harbors and balanced vessels,
marveled at meeting places where heroes assembled, and marveled
also at towering walls, fitted strongly with stakes, a great wonder.
Then, when they came to the glorious house of Alcinous the ruler,
there the gray-eyed goddess Athena began to address him:
“Fatherly stranger, behold now the house you have asked me to show you.
There you shall find the Zeus-nurtured kings at the feast in the palace.
Enter within, and do not be frightened at heart; for a bold man
always is best in the end in whatever endeavor he makes there,
even if he should arrive from an alien country among them.
First you shall come on the queen of the household inside of the palace;
Arete is her name, and she comes from the parents who also
brought into life Alcinous the king who commands the Phaeacians.
First Nausithous was born to the earth-shaking lord Poseidon
and Periboea, most beautiful woman of all then,
youngest among all the daughters of great-hearted lord Eurymedon,
who in the past was the king of the overbearing Giants;
he destroyed that reckless people and likewise destroyed himself also.
Then with the maiden Poseidon lay and fathered a great son,
great-hearted lord Nausithous, king of the whole Phaeacian people.
Then Nausithous fathered Alcinous and lord Rhexenor;
though still a bridegroom and sonless there in his palace, Rhexenor
fell to Apollo, who struck with a silver bow, leaving one child,
only Arete, whom then Alcinous married and honored
more than all other women are honored throughout the whole wide earth-land,
all of the women who live in the houses beneath their husbands.
So much heartfelt honor she had and continues to carry,
both from the children she loves and from lord Alcinous himself and
all of the people, who look at the queen as they look at a goddess,
greeting her warmly whenever she walks through the streets of the city.
She is herself never lacking in noble understanding;
those she regards with her favor, including men, she delivers
out of their quarrels. If she in her heart should regard you with kindness,
there is a hope that your family still shall be seen, and you shall come
into your high-roofed house and the land of the people who fathered you.”
Thus having spoken, the gray-eyed goddess Athena departed,
going across the unharvested sea from the beautiful island
Scheria, coming to Marathon and broad-wayed Athens,
entering there the strongly built house of lord Erechtheus.
Meanwhile Odysseus went to the glorious house of Alcinous;
there as he stood, before coming to bronze at the threshold, his dear heart
churned in his chest, for a shining as bright as the sun or the moonlight
ran through the high-roofed house of the great-hearted lord Alcinous.
Bronze were the walls that extended in both directions from doorway
into the innermost chamber, encircled with blue-colored enamel.
Golden doors sealed up on the inside the strongly built palace;
silver doorposts were standing upon the great threshold of bronze-work,
silver the lintel above, while the handle was fashioned of gold-work.
There upon either side stood dogs that were silver and golden,
made by Hephaestus himself with the craft and the cunning he carries,
there to keep watch on the palace of great-hearted lord Alcinous,
deathless forever and free from old age through all of existence.
Seats stood within, all around by the walls on either direction,
running from threshold to innermost chamber in one unbroken order;
over them all had been thrown fine coverings woven by women.
There the Phaeacian leaders were seated in orderly places,
drinking and eating, for these provisions of theirs never failed them.
Golden young men upon strongly constructed pedestals stood there,
holding aloft in their hands burning torches, continually giving
light through the palace by night to illuminate those at the feasting.
Fifty serving women perform all the work of the household;
some of them grind the apple-gold grain in the mills of the palace,
others are weaving before the looms and are turning the spindles,
seated together as closely as leaves on the tall-growing poplar;
oil drips softly and smooth from the linen that closely they weave there.
Just as Phaeacian men surpass every other in knowledge
how to propel the fast-faring ship through the sea, so the women
master the loom, for Athena has granted to them beyond others
knowledge of beautiful handiwork joined with a noble intelligence.
Outside the courtyard and close to the doors is a great spreading orchard,
four acres large, with a hedge driven round it in opposite courses.
There magnificent trees stand flourishing, covered with leafage,
pear trees, pomegranates, and apples with fruit that is radiant,
figs that are sweet, and the richly flourishing fruit of the olive.
Never is fruit on these trees ever ruined or ever found wanting,
winter or summer, throughout the full year, but continually West Wind,
breathing across them, makes some of the fruit grow and ripens the others.
Pear after pear grows old, apple following apple;
cluster on cluster of grapes, fig after fig grow to ripeness.
There as well is his vineyard, abundant in fruit and established;
part is a level and open place where the harvest is drying,
baking beneath the sun; other grapes they are gathering in there,
others they tread, while the unripe grapes grow in front of the workers,
some rows shedding the blossom and others beginning to purple.
There beside the furthest row of the vines are the orderly garden
beds of every green that are shining throughout the full year there.
Two springs rise; one stream is scattered throughout the entire
garden, and one runs under the threshold that enters the courtyard,
flowing toward the high palace, where townspeople draw up the water.
Such were the glittering gifts of the gods at the house of Alcinous.
There the much-enduring Odysseus stood in amazement;
then, when his heart had marveled at everything there in the palace,
rapidly he stepped over the threshold and entered the great hall.
There he discovered Phaeacian leaders and counselors standing,
pouring the wine from their cups to the sharp-sighted slayer of Argus,
since their last pouring was always to him when they thought about sleeping.
Then the much-enduring Odysseus went through the palace,
clothed in the thickening mist that the goddess Athena had poured there,
until he came to Arete and lord Alcinous the ruler.
Then he threw both of his arms round the knees of the queenly Arete;
just at that moment the god-sent mist fell away from around him.
Everyone fell into silence throughout the great house when they saw him,
watching the stranger in wonder, while lord Odysseus entreated:
“Queen Arete, the daughter of godlike Rhexenor, hear me:
after great labors I come to your knees and the knees of your husband,
also to these at the banquet. May all of the gods grant them blessed
lives, and may each of them give to his children the goods in his palace,
also the honor the people have granted to him in the country.
Yet for myself, send me quickly, that I may arrive in my homeland,
for I have suffered long, far away from the people who love me.”
Thus having spoken, he sat in the ash by the fire on the hearthstone;
all of the company stayed where they were and continued in silence.
After a long time the old lord Echeneus addressed them,
elder in birth than the rest of the men of Phaeacia assembled,
excellent speaker, with knowledge of many things out of the old days.
Holding a kindly intention, he spoke and addressed the assembly:
“Lord Alcinous, this is not the proper or beautiful manner,
having a stranger sit on the ground in the ash by the hearth-fire,
while all the people restrain themselves and await your decision.
Come then, raise up the stranger yourself and provide him a resting
place on a silver-studded chair; and command all the heralds
now to mix further wine, so we may pour out to Zeus who delights in
thunder, who travels beside all suppliants deserving of honor.
Then let the housekeeper give from her stores to the stranger his supper.”
Then, when the sacred strength of Alcinous heard what was spoken,
straightway he took by the hand battle-wise and ingenious Odysseus,
raising him up from the hearth and seating him there on a bright chair,
making his well-beloved and kindly son Laodamas
rise, who had sat at his side, and whom he loved more than the others.
Then an attendant brought water for washing their hands in a pitcher,
beautiful, fashioned of gold, and she poured it above a great silver
basin for washing; beside them she drew up a table with polish.
Then the respected housekeeper carried the bread and set it
there before them with manifold dishes, and gave of her stores freely.
Then great-hearted and much-enduring Odysseus ate and
drank, while the strength of Alcinous spoke to the herald beside him:
“Lord Pontonous, now mix us a bowl and distribute the wine here
all through the hall, so we also may pour out to Zeus who delights in
thunder, who travels beside all suppliants deserving of honor.”
Thus did he speak, and Pontonous mixed up the heartening wine there,
serving them all and beginning with drops in each cup for the deathless.
Then, when they poured to the gods and had drunk as their spirits desired it,
lord Alcinous spoke and addressed everyone in the great hall:
“Hear me, Phaeacian leaders and counselors, while I am speaking
what in the heart in my breast has commanded me now to declare here.
Now you have feasted; return to your homes and lie down for resting.
Come morning, we shall call into assembly more of the elders,
welcome the stranger here in our palace, and offer the gods all
beautiful victims; and afterward we shall consider his sending,
how without any labor or suffering under our escort
he may arrive in his own beloved fatherland, taking
joy in a speedy arrival, although he has come from a far land,
suffering no harm at all and no evil amid the long passage,
not until he sets foot in the country he calls his own country.
Afterward he shall suffer whatever his Destiny and the
solemnly spinning Fates spun out when his mother had borne him.
Yet if he is some immortal who comes from the heavens above us,
then the immortals must fashion a new kind of purpose against us.
Always before this the gods have appeared to our eyes without hiding,
every time we present them with glorious hecatomb offerings;
sitting among us they feast in the place where we mortals are sitting.
Even if one of us meets one of them on the road as a lone man,
they do not hide, for we are of the nearest kin to immortals,
just as the wild race of Giants and Cyclopes also are godlike.”
Then resourceful Odysseus spoke and addressed him in answer:
“Lord Alcinous, ease your heart, for I am not one of the deathless
gods who inhabit the open expanses of heaven, resembling
them in the form or the stature; instead, I resemble the mortals.
Whichever people you know in humanity carrying heaviest
burdens of pain, I would liken myself in my sorrows to their kind.
Yes, I could tell you a longer account of the evils I suffered,
all the afflictions I labored through by the will of the gods here.
Yet let me finish my supper in spite of the grief I am bearing;
nothing is more dog-shameless than hateful hunger within us,
which by its violence forces a man to remember its presence,
though he is worn by his labor and carries great sorrow within him,
just as I carry great sorrow at heart; but hunger forever
urges me onward to eating and drinking, and makes me forget all
things I have suffered, and even commands me to fill it completely.
You should bestir yourselves when the Dawn shows her light in the morning,
setting unfortunate me on the soil of my fathers and homeland,
even though greatly afflicted; and may I die when I have seen there
all my possessions and slaves and the great high-roofed house I remember.”
Thus did he speak, and they all gave approval and urged that the stranger
quickly be sent to his homeland, because he had spoken with justice.
Then, when they poured to the gods and had drunk as their spirits desired it,
all of the others went home to lie down and sleep in their houses,
leaving the noble Odysseus behind in the hall by himself there.
Queen Arete remained there beside him and godlike Alcinous,
while the attendants removed from the hall all remains of the feasting.
Then white-armed Arete began to address them and question,
since she had recognized mantle and tunic, the beautiful clothing
she had herself made together with serving women around her.
Raising her voice, she addressed great Odysseus in winged language:
“Stranger, this first of all I shall ask you and ask you directly:
who are you, whence have you come, and who gave you the clothing you carry?
Did you not say that you came to this country while wandering sea-ways?”
Then resourceful Odysseus spoke and addressed her in answer:
“Hard it would be, O queen, to relate every grief in its order,
since the immortals in heaven have given me manifold sorrows.
Yet I shall answer the thing you have asked and are seeking to learn here.
Far in the sea is an island, Ogygia, distant from all lands;
there Atlas' daughter resides, the beautiful-haired and deceptive
goddess Calypso, a terrible power, whom no one approaches,
neither the gods nor the mortals who live on the grain-bearing earth-land.
Yet some divinity brought unfortunate me to her hearthstone,
only myself, after Zeus with a flash of his white-colored lightning
shattered apart my swift ship in the midst of the wine-dark water.
There all the rest of my excellent companions together had perished;
I threw my arms round the keel of the curving ship and was carried
over the sea for nine days; on the tenth, in the blackness of nighttime,
gods brought me close to Ogygia, the island where lovely-haired and
terrible goddess Calypso resides; and she welcomed and loved me,
caring for me with devotion and saying that she would immortal
make me and ageless as well through all of the days of existence.
Yet she could never persuade the heart in my breast to accept it.
Seven years long I remained there without an end, and forever
watered with tears the immortal clothing Calypso had given.
Then, when the eighth year finally came as the seasons were wheeling,
only at last she commanded and urged me to make my departure,
either because Zeus sent her a message or changed was her own mind.
She sent me off on a raft joined up with securely bound timbers,
giving me plentiful bread and sweet wine and clothing my body
there in immortal garments; she sent me a mild following fair wind.
Seventeen days I continued my sailing across the salt water;
then on the eighteenth day all the shadowy mountains appeared there,
mountains belonging to you, and my own heart was gladdened to see them,
though I was fated to meet once again with abundant affliction,
sent against me by lord of the earth-shaking waters Poseidon.
He set the winds against me and closed every road of returning,
raising a sea beyond speaking; and no wave allowed me to travel
onward upon my raft, although I was groaning in anguish.
Then in the storm was my raft torn apart, but I journeyed by swimming,
cutting across the great chasm, until both the wind and the water
carried me close to your coastline and brought me at last to your country.
There, as I climbed from the water, the waves would have hurled me on shoreline,
dashing my body on giant rocks in a joyless location.
Yet I gave way and returned to the water and swam till I came to
one river mouth, where the ground at the last seemed the finest for landing,
clear of all stones, and a place of protection existed from wind there.
There I collapsed and recovered my spirit, and ambrosial nighttime
came; from the river that Zeus made swollen I climbed, and I entered
under the bushes, where fallen leaves I had gathered around me;
there some divinity poured out a measureless slumber upon me.
There among leaves with a heart overcome by sorrow I slumbered
all of the night and the morning and on to the middle of daylight;
sun was descending before the sweet sleep let me go from its power.
Then I beheld your daughter's attendants at play on the seashore,
while she was there in their midst and resembled the gods in her beauty.
There I entreated her; she was not lacking in noble discernment,
such as you could not expect from the young when you meet them directly,
face to face, since younger people are always unthinking.
Food she provided in plentiful measure and fire-bright wine there,
bathed me as well in the stream, and she gave me the clothing you look at.
This, though I grieve as I tell it, is how the whole matter has happened.”
Then in his turn Alcinous answered and spoke to Odysseus:
“Stranger, in this one matter my child did not think in the proper
manner, because with her serving attendants she brought you not homeward,
even though she was the first one to whom you had made supplication.”
Then resourceful Odysseus spoke and addressed him in answer:
“Hero, do not now scold your faultless daughter about this;
she did command me to follow along with her serving attendants.
I was unwilling because of my fear and a sense of the shame there,
lest perhaps your own heart should be darkened at seeing us walking;
we are a jealousy-minded race, all the mortals who live here.”
Then in his turn Alcinous answered and spoke to Odysseus:
“Stranger, the heart that is held in my breast is never so fashioned
that I am angered for nothing; due measure in everything is better.
If only Zeus our father, Athena, and lordly Apollo
granted that, being the man you are now, with your thinking like my own,
you take my child as your wife and be called my son by our marriage,
staying among us; a house and possessions would then be provided,
if you remained of your will. No Phaeacian ever shall hold you
here by compulsion; may Zeus our father forbid such a manner.
As for your sending, I set it tomorrow, so you may be certain.
Until that time you shall lie overcome by the sweetness of sleeping;
they shall row over calm seas, until you arrive in your homeland,
come to your house or whatever location is dearest unto you,
even if lying far further away from our home than Euboea,
which all our people declare is the farthest of countries, the people
having once seen it when they took the fair-haired lord Rhadamanthus
there for a visit to Tityus, child of the earth-mother Gaia.
All of the way there they went, accomplishing it without labor,
sailing again and completing the homeward return the same day there.
You shall discover yourself in your heart how greatly my vessels
are the most excellent ships, and my young men are best with the oar-blades.”
Thus did he speak, and the much-enduring lordly Odysseus
felt great delight; and he spoke in a prayer and addressed the immortals:
“Father Zeus, may Alcinous fulfill every word he has spoken;
then on the grain-giving earth his fame shall never be quenched there,
while I shall come to my country at last and the home of my fathers.”
Thus did the two speak words in this manner between one another.
Meanwhile, white-armed Arete instructed the serving attendants
under the portico there to set beds and to spread on them beautiful
purple blankets, and over the top to lay rugs for the sleepers,
placing the thick woolen mantles above them to serve as a covering.
Out of the great hall they came, in their hands burning torches;
then, when the close-woven bed they had briskly prepared and made ready,
coming beside Odysseus there, they encouraged him, speaking:
“Rise now, stranger, and go to your rest, for your bed has been fashioned.”
Thus did they speak, and the thought of his sleep was a welcome one to him.
So in that place the much-enduring Odysseus slumbered,
there on a corded bed underneath the resounding veranda.
Lord Alcinous slept in the innermost room of the high house,
where the queenly lady, his wife, made his bed and his rest ready.
