The Odyssey — Book XI

The dead: Tiresias’s prophecy, Anticleia, the heroines, Agamemnon, Achilles, and Ajax.

When we had come to the ship and descended again to the seashore,
first we proceeded to launch the vessel on glittering sea-brine,
setting the mast with its sail in the hollow black ship as we labored;
then we took hold of the sheep and conveyed them aboard her, and we too
climbed there in grief, while the great tears fell from our eyes in abundance.
Circe behind our vessel, the dark-blue-prowed ship of the seaway,
sent us a following wind that filled out the sail, a companion
excellent, Circe of beautiful hair, dread goddess, humanly speaking.
Then, when we carefully tended the tackle throughout the black vessel,
taking our seats, we were borne on our way by the wind and the steersman.
All of the day was the sail spread wide as she crossed through the sea-depths;
then went the sun from the sky, and the roads of the world became darkened.

So she arrived at the limits of Ocean, deep in his current.
There is the land and the city inhabited by Cimmerian people,
always enveloped in mist and in cloud; for the sun in his brightness
never looks down on the people below with the light of his sunbeams,
neither ascending the sky and approaching the starry dominion,
nor when he turns from the heavens again toward earth and its creatures;
murderous night is extended above these miserable mortals.
Coming ashore, we beached the vessel and unloaded the sheep there;
then by the stream of Ocean we made our way on our journey,
till we arrived at the place that the goddess Circe appointed.

There Perimedes and faithful Eurylochus held the victims.
Drawing the sharp-edged sword that hung from beside my strong thigh there,
I dug a trench that extended a cubit in each of its measures;
round it I poured a libation to all of the people departed,
honey and milk being first, then sweet wine poured as the second,
water the third, and above these sprinkled the white flour of barley.
Earnestly then I entreated the strengthless heads of the dead men,
vowing that, after my coming to Ithaca, there in my palace
I would give them my best barren cow and heap treasures for burning;
then for Tiresias alone I would slaughter a black-fleeced
ram that excelled all the others in strength and in worth in my sheepfold.
When with my vows and my prayers I had called on the races of dead men,
taking the sheep, I cut both of their throats with the pitiless bronze blade
over the trench, and the dark blood flowed; and the spirits assembled,
souls of the people who died, coming upward from Erebus’ darkness:
brides and unmarried youths and the old men broken by sorrow,
delicate maidens whose hearts were newly acquainted with anguish,
many men wounded and torn by the bronze-pointed spears in the battle,
warriors slaughtered in war with their blood-dark armor upon them.
Flocking around the pit in their crowds from every direction,
making a terrible cry—and the pale fear captured my spirit.
Then I encouraged my men and commanded the faithful companions
there to be skinning the sheep that lay by the pitiless bronze slain,
burning the bodies and offering prayers before the immortals,
powerful Hades and dread Persephone, queen of the darkness.
Drawing for myself the sharp-edged sword from beside my strong thigh there,
I sat and did not allow the strengthless heads of the dead men
near to the blood until I had questioned Tiresias fully.

First came the spirit of my companion Elpenor to meet me,
since he had not been buried beneath wide earth in a grave mound.
There in the palace of Circe we left his body behind us,
neither lamented nor buried, because other labor compelled us.
Seeing him there, I wept, and my heart took pity upon him;
raising my voice, I addressed him, and these words took wing as I uttered:
“Tell me, Elpenor, how you arrived in the shadowy darkness.
Coming on foot, you outstripped me although I was borne in a black ship.”
Thus did I speak, and he groaned with a wail and responded in answer:
“Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus endlessly resourceful,
evil fate from a god and immeasurable wine were my ruin.
Lying asleep in the palace of Circe, I did not remember
how to return by descending again on the long-built ladder;
headlong I fell from the roof, and the bones of my neck were completely
snapped from the spine, and my spirit descended to Hades’ dominion.
Now by those who remain and are absent from us, I beseech you:
first by your wife, then your father, the man who attended your childhood,
then by Telemachus, left as your only child in the palace.
Well do I know that on going from here and the house of the death-god,
you will return in your well-made vessel to Aeaea’s island.
There, O lord, I command you to call to remembrance my sorrow.
Do not depart and abandon me there unlamented, unburied,
turning away, lest I bring down the wrath of the gods upon you.
Burn me together with all of the armor that still is my own there;
pile up a tomb on the shore of the gray and unharvested sea-brine,
marking a luckless man, so the people to come may remember.
Do this for me, and upon the grave mound plant the oar that I handled,
rowing while I was alive in the midst of my faithful companions.”
Thus did he speak, and I answered the spirit and said in response then:
“Luckless man, I will carry out all these things and fulfill them.”
So we sat there, one answering one with sorrowful language,
I on this side of the trench while holding my sword by the blood-pool,
while on the other the phantom of my dead comrade continued.

Then came the spirit of my mother, already departed,
lord Autolycus’ daughter Anticleia, born to the great-heart,
whom I had left still living when going to sacred Ilium.
Seeing her there, I wept, and my heart took pity upon her;
yet, though mourning her bitterly, I did not allow her to come there
near to the blood until I had questioned Tiresias fully.

Then came the spirit of Theban Tiresias, prophet and seer-man,
holding a golden scepter; he knew who I was and addressed me:
“Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus endlessly resourceful,
why, unhappy one, have you left behind you the brightness of sunlight,
coming to look on the dead and this place where delight cannot enter?
Draw yourself back from the trench and withdraw your sharp sword from over it,
so I may drink of the blood and reveal you the certain prediction.”
Thus did he speak; I withdrew and I thrust the silver-embellished
sword in its sheath once again. When the prophet had drunk the black life-blood,
only then did the blameless seer turn toward me and answer:
“Honey-sweet homeward return is your wish, O shining Odysseus,
but an immortal will render it grievous. I do not imagine
earth-shaking lord Poseidon will fail to remember; the anger
planted within him endures, for you blinded the son he held dearest.
Even through hardships and sorrow, however, you still may return home,
if you are willing to master your own heart and those of your comrades,
from the first hour when your well-made vessel approaches the island
called Thrinacia, after escaping the violet sea-depths.
There you will find at their pasture the cattle and sturdy sheep-flocks
sacred to Helios, lord who sees all things and hears every utterance.
If you leave these all unharmed and remember your difficult homeward
journey, you still may arrive upon Ithaca, suffering greatly.
But if you harm them, I prophesy utter destruction
both for your ship and companions; and even if you should escape it,
late will you come and in evil condition, with all comrades lost there,
borne in another man’s vessel, and finding affliction at home there:
arrogant men who are eating away all the wealth of your household,
courting your godlike wife and bestowing their gifts for the bridal.
Surely, when home, you will punish the violent acts they committed.
After you slaughter the suitors within the halls of your palace,
whether by cunning or openly striking with sharp-edged bronze there,
then undertake one more journey, a well-shaped oar on your shoulder,
till you arrive among people who have no knowledge of sea-brine,
people who never eat food with the salt of the sea intermixed there,
having no knowledge of crimson-cheeked ships that travel the sea-roads,
nor of the well-shaped oars that serve as the wings of the vessels.
I will reveal you a sign unmistakable; you will not miss it.
When another traveler meets you abroad on the road there,
saying you carry a winnowing fan on your glittering shoulder,
then in the earth at that place you must fix the well-fashioned oar-blade,
offering beautiful victims to lord Poseidon, the sea-god:
sacrifice one ram there with a bull and a boar that mounts she-swine.
Then turn away toward your home and present to the gods their appointed
sacred hecatombs, to the deathless gods of the wide-ruling heavens,
every immortal in order. Your death will arrive from the seaward,
death without violence, peaceful, and take you away in the ripeness
under a sleek old age, with the people around you in plenty.
These words I speak are the truth, and the course of events will confirm them.”
Thus did he speak, and I answered the prophet and said in response then:
“Lord Tiresias, surely the gods spun all of this future.
Come now, tell me this other, and speak with the truth as I ask you.
There I behold the spirit of my dead mother beside us,
sitting in silence close to the blood, and she does not venture
either to look in the face of her son or address him with language.
Tell me, lord, by what means may she know I am truly her own son?”
Thus did I speak, and at once the spirit responded in answer:
“Easily spoken the word I will tell you and set in your thinking:
whomever among the people departed you willingly suffer
near to the blood, that spirit will tell you the truth in its fullness;
whomever you will not allow, that spirit will turn and depart you.”
Thus having spoken, the spirit of lord Tiresias departed,
into the house of Hades, when all of the fates were revealed there.
Yet I remained where I stood until my mother approached me,
drinking the dark-clouded blood, and at once she knew me and addressed me;
wailing aloud, she spoke, and these words took wing as she uttered:
“Child, how did you come living beneath the shadowy darkness?
Hard is the vision of all these things for the people still living;
terrible waters and powerful rivers are lying between us,
Ocean first, which no person on foot has the power to cross over,
never, unless in possession of one well-constructed black vessel.
Have you but now come wandering here from the country of Trojans,
after so long a time, with your ship and the faithful companions?
Have you not come to Ithaca yet, nor seen your wife in the palace?”
Thus did she speak, and I answered my mother and said in response then:
“Mother, necessity brought me below to the house of the death-god,
there to inquire of the spirit of Theban Tiresias, prophet.
I have not yet gone near to Achaea, nor have I ever
set foot again on the land that is ours, but wander in sorrow
since that first day I followed the noble lord Agamemnon,
marching to Ilium, land of fine horses, to battle the Trojans.
Come now, tell me this other, and speak with the truth as I ask you:
what kind of death that lays humankind low overwhelmed and subdued you?
Was it prolonged disease? Did Artemis, lady of arrows,
come with the gentle shafts of her bow and destroy you beside them?
Tell me as well of my father and son whom I left in the palace:
whether my honor is safe in their keeping, or whether another
man now possesses it all, and they say I will never be homeward.
Tell me the mind and the purpose as well of the wife I have wedded:
does she remain by the boy and keep everything safe in the household,
or has the best of Achaeans already taken and wed her?”
Thus did I speak, and at once my honored mother responded:
“Yes, she remains in your halls with a heart that is steadfast and patient;
there she abides in the palace, and always in misery grievous
nights are consumed from her life, and the days are dissolved in her weeping.
No man yet has taken possession of your royal honor;
still unopposed, Telemachus tends to the fields and is feasting
there at the equal banquets that suit an administrator of justice,
since every man calls him forth. But your father remains in the country,
never descending to town, and possesses no bed for his sleeping,
neither a bedframe nor cloaks nor the brilliant blankets to cover him.
All through the winter he sleeps where the slaves in the household are sleeping,
close to the fire in the ashes, and dresses his body in rags there;
but when the summer arrives and the generous autumn is ripening,
then on the rising ground of his vineyard, wherever he chooses,
beds of the fallen leaves are scattered along on the earth there.
There he lies grieving, and sorrow grows great in the heart that is in him,
yearning for your homecoming, while harsh old age bears upon him.
So it was likewise with me: so I perished and met my destruction.
Neither within the palace did keen-eyed Artemis find me,
pouring her gentle arrows upon me and taking my life there,
nor did disease come upon me, the kind which commonly wears down
limbs with its hateful wasting and draws from the body its spirit.
No; it was longing for you, for your counsels, O shining Odysseus,
and for your tenderheartedness, robbing me of honey-sweet lifebreath.”
Thus did she speak; and I, pondering deeply, was eager within me
there to embrace the spirit of my dead mother and hold her.
Three times I started toward her, and three times the heart bade me clasp her;
three times away from my hands like a shadow or dream she went flying.
Sharper each time did the pain in my own heart gather within me;
raising my voice, I addressed her, and these words took wing as I uttered:
“Mother, why will you not remain when I yearn to embrace you,
so that, even in Hades, our arms may be thrown round each other,
both of us taking our fill of the terrible chill of lamenting?
Or are you only a phantom that queen Persephone sent me,
so I may suffer yet more in my pitiful groaning and weeping?”
Thus did I speak, and at once my honored mother responded:
“Ah, my child, most luckless of all humankind in your sorrow,
Zeus’s daughter Persephone does not deceive you in any way.
This is the settled condition of mortals whenever they perish:
sinews no longer are holding together the flesh and the bone-frame;
these are destroyed by the fierce and powerful strength of the blazing
fire, when life has departed away from the white bones within them;
then like a dream the spirit flies free and is hovering onward.
Hasten toward light, however, as quickly as ever you can now;
mark these things, so you may hereafter report them all to your wife there.”
So the two of us stayed exchanging our words with each other.
Then came the women—for queen Persephone sent them before me—
all who had once been the wives and the daughters of excellent heroes.
Flocking in multitudes there, they surrounded the dark-colored life-blood;
I in my mind was considering how I could question each woman.
This, as I thought it all over, appeared to my mind as the best plan:
drawing the long-edged sword that hung from beside my strong thigh there,
I did not suffer them all at one time to drink the black life-blood.
One after one they approached in a file, and each woman recounted
all of her birth and her lineage; I questioned every one of them.

There as the first among women I saw highborn lady Tyro,
saying that she was the child of the blameless ruler Salmoneus,
also the wife of Cretheus, the son of the lordly Aeolus.
She fell in love with a river, Enipeus’ beautiful god-stream,
far and away the most beautiful river that runs on the earth-land;
often she walked by Enipeus’ beautiful waters and wandered.
Then lord Poseidon, the earth-holding shaker, assuming the river’s
likeness, lay down there beside her at mouths of the eddying water.
Darkly a wave like a mountain arose and surrounded them, arching
over them both, and it hid the immortal and mortal woman.
There he unfastened her maidenly girdle and poured sleep upon her.
After the god had completed the works of desire and of loving,
taking her hand in his own, he addressed her and called her by title:
“Woman, rejoice in our loving; when this same season returns here,
you will give birth to illustrious children; the bed of immortals
never is fruitless. Attend to your children and carefully rear them.
Go to your home now, remain in your silence, and utter no god’s name;
know I am lord Poseidon, the powerful shaker of earth-land.”
Thus having spoken, he plunged underneath the wave-surging sea-depths.
She, having then conceived, gave birth to both Pelias, Neleus,
each of whom grew into powerful servants of Zeus the almighty.
Pelias dwelt in Iolcus, the wide-dancing city, with rich flocks;
Neleus meanwhile inhabited Pylos, the city of sand-dunes.
Other sons this queen among women gave Cretheus as children:
Aeson, Amythaon, skilled with the chariot, Pheres.
Next I beheld Antiope, the daughter of river Asopus,
proud to have rested in love in the very embraces of great Zeus;
she gave birth to twin sons, Amphion and lordly Zethus,
first to establish the site of the seven-gated city of Thebes there,
walling it round, for without such a wall they could not have settled,
powerful though they were, in the broad-dancing spaces of Thebes there.
Next I beheld Amphitryon’s beautiful wife, lady Alcmene,
mother of lionhearted Heracles, bold in the battle,
born when she rested in love in the mighty embraces of great Zeus;
also Megara, high-spirited Creon’s beautiful daughter,
wife of Amphitryon’s son, whose strength was eternally tireless.

Then I beheld Epicaste, the beautiful mother of Oedipus,
she who accomplished a terrible deed in her mind’s unawareness,
wedding her son, after he had taken the life of his father;
soon the immortals made these things known to the people around them.
Yet in beloved Thebes he continued to rule the Cadmeians,
suffering anguish because of the gods’ destruction-appointed
counsels; but she went down into Hades’ strongly barred palace,
fastening high on the roof beam a noose that would hang her in midair,
seized by her sorrow, and leaving her son those torments unnumbered,
all that the Furies belonging to mothers are bringing to fullness.

Then I saw Chloris, a woman of beauty beyond every telling,
whom lord Neleus married for beauty with gifts beyond counting,
youngest of daughters descended from Iasus’ son lord Amphion,
who once ruled in his strength in Minyan Orchomenus’ city.
She was the queen of Pylos and bore him illustrious children:
Nestor and Chromius, also the lordly prince Periclymenus;
after the sons she bore mighty Pero, a marvel to mortals,
courted by every man in the neighboring lands; but her father
would not give her to any man unable to steal from the country
mighty Iphicles’ broad-browed cattle with horns that were curving,
out of Phylace, dangerous herd. The blameless prophet
only attempted the deed, but the merciless fate of a god bound
him in cruel bonds, and the brutal herdsmen detained him.
But when the months and the days at last had approached their completion,
after the year turned round and the seasons again had returned there,
mighty Iphicles finally freed him from bonds in the prison,
after he told every fate; and Zeus’s will was accomplished.

Then I beheld queen Leda, the wife of the lord Tyndareus,
she who bore two sons to Tyndareus, powerful-hearted:
horse-breaking Castor, and Polydeuces, excellent boxer.
Both are embraced by the life-giving earth, yet both are still living;
even beneath the earth they have honor from Zeus the almighty,
living in turn every other day and then dying in turn there,
each on his separate day; they possess equal honor with godhood.

Next I beheld Iphimedeia, the wife of lord Aloeus,
she who declared she had lain in the arms of the god Poseidon.
Two sons she bore—but their days in the world of the living were brief ones—
godlike Otus and Ephialtes, renowned among all men,
tallest by far of the mortals the grain-giving earth ever nurtured,
also the fairest in form with the sole exception Orion.
Nine years old, they measured nine cubits across in their broadness,
also in height their bodies extended to nine mighty fathoms.
Even the gods they threatened, proposing to carry the tumult
of furious war to Olympus, the home of the deathless immortals.
Ossa they labored to set on Olympus, then leafy and forested
Pelion high upon Ossa, that heaven might be made accessible.
This they would surely have done if they came to the measure of manhood;
but the great son of Zeus whom Leto of beautiful hair bore
slew them both, before on the sides of their heads the first down bloomed,
growing to thicken their chins with the flourishing beard of the young man.

Phaedra I saw and Procris, and beautiful princess Ariadne,
daughter of deadly-minded king Minos, whom Theseus carried
once from the island of Crete, making sail for the sacred Athenian
hill, but he took no delight in her; Artemis earlier killed her
there on the sea-ringed Dia, because Dionysus accused her.
Maera I saw, and Clymene, also detestable Eriphyle,
she who accepted precious gold for betraying the husband she married.
Yet I could never recount every woman I saw there or name them,
all of the wives and the daughters belonging to powerful heroes;
god-given night would come to an end before I had finished.
Now it is time I should sleep, whether going to my swift vessel
and my companions, or staying. My sending belongs to the gods and to you all.”
Thus did he speak, and all of the people remained without speaking,
held by the spell of his story throughout the shadowy palace.
Then white-armed Arete arose and began to address them:
“Men of Phaeacia, how does this man now appear to your judgment,
both in his physical form and his stature and balanced perception?
He is my guest, but every one of you shares in the honor.
Therefore do not be eager to send him away, nor diminish
gifts to a man with such need, since many beautiful treasures
lie in your houses through all the generous will of immortals.”
Then the old hero Echeneus arose and addressed the assembly,
eldest of all of the other Phaeacian men by his birth date:
“Friends, our intelligent queen has not spoken wide of our purpose,
nor has she missed it; obey every word that the queen has commanded.
Yet on Alcinous here both the word and the deed are depending.”
Then Alcinous answered the elder and said in response there:
“This word will stand, and as surely as I have my life and am reigning
over the oar-loving people Phaeacian, so I will fulfill it.
Let this guest, though he hungers for homecoming, bear to remain here
till tomorrow arrives and I make every gift full in measure.
All of the men will attend to his sending; but I above others,
since in the land of Phaeacians I hold the kingly dominion.”
Then resourceful Odysseus addressed him in words of response there:
“Lord Alcinous, most renowned among all the peoples,
if you were asking that I should remain for a year in the palace,
then made ready my sending and gave me illustrious treasures,
even would I choose that, for it surely would be more profitable,
coming at last to the land that I love with a fuller possession.
Then I should certainly find myself more honored and cherished
among the people who saw me come sailing again to my Ithaca.”
Then Alcinous answered the hero and said in response there:
“Lord Odysseus, looking at you, we never could liken
you to a swindler or thief, such as dark earth nurtures in plenty,
scattering crops of such men through the length and the breadth of the nations,
fashioning falsehoods from things no mortal perception could question.
Beautiful form clothes every word, and within is a noble
spirit; and just like a singer who knows, you have told us the story,
both the disastrous sorrows of Argives and those you encountered.
Come now, tell me this other, and speak with the truth as I ask you:
whether you saw there any of your companions, the godlike,
those who accompanied you into Troy and encountered their death there.
Marvelously long is the night, inexhaustible; this is no hour yet
here in the hall to be sleeping. Continue to tell me your wonders.
I could endure until shining Dawn in her glory appeared here,
if you could bear in the hall to recount every sorrow you suffered.”
Then resourceful Odysseus addressed him in words of response there:
“Lord Alcinous, most renowned among all the peoples,
there is a season for many a story, a season for sleeping.
Yet if your heart still desires to listen, I will not deny you
stories of other events that are even more worthy of pity:
all of the sorrows of friends who died at a later time there,
men who escaped from the groan and the war cry of Trojan battalions,
only to die on the homeward way through the will of an evil woman.

When Persephone, holy and queenly, had driven the spirits
this way and that of the women who died and had gone to the death-world,
there came the soul of the lord Agamemnon, the son born of Atreus,
grieving; and round him the spirits were gathered of all those companions
slaughtered with him in Aegisthus’ palace and meeting their death there.
At once he knew me after he drank of the dark-colored life-blood;
shrilly he wept with a cry, and the great tears fell from his eyelids,
stretching his hands in his longing to reach me and take me and hold me.
Yet there was neither the strength still fixed in the limbs nor the sinewy
force which had filled his supple and powerful body in old days.
Seeing him there, I wept, and my heart took pity upon him;
raising my voice, I addressed him, and these words took wing as I uttered:
“Atreus’ son Agamemnon, O most renowned king of armies,
what kind of death that lays humankind low overwhelmed and subdued you?
Did lord Poseidon overcome you aboard the black vessels,
raising a terrible blast of the ruinous winds in his anger?
Or did malicious men cut you down on the dry land while you were
stealing their cattle and beautiful sheep, or perhaps while you battled
over their city and all of the women inhabiting in it?”
Thus did I speak, and at once his spirit responded in answer:
“Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus endlessly resourceful,
lord Poseidon did not overcome me aboard the black vessels,
raising a terrible blast of the ruinous winds in his anger;
nor did malicious men cut me down on the dry land and slaughter me.
No: my death and my doom were devised by the treacherous lord Aegisthus,
aided by my accursed wife, when he called me inside and then killed me,
feasting me first, as a man at the manger will slaughter an ox there.
Thus I died by the most pitiable death, and around me the others,
all my companions, were ceaselessly slaughtered like white-tusked swine there,
cut down inside of the house of a wealthy and powerful ruler,
whether to furnish a wedding, a feast, or a generous banquet.
You have been present before at the violent deaths of great numbers,
slaughtered alone or together within the ferocity of battle;
yet you would certainly grieve in your heart above all at that one sight,
seeing how there by the wine bowl and tables abundantly loaded
all of us lay in the hall, while the floor smoked upward with life-blood.
Most to be pitied of all was the voice I heard of Cassandra,
Priam’s daughter, whom treacherous Clytemnestra then murdered
over my body; and dying, I tried to lift up both my hands there,
striking them down on the sword, while that dog-faced woman withdrew then.
Nor, though I went into Hades, did she have the heart to turn toward me,
closing my mouth with her hands or shutting my eyes for the death-world.
Nothing is truly more dreadful or shamelessly doglike than woman
when she establishes such atrocious deeds in her thinking,
just as the woman designed this deed that cannot be spoken,
plotting the death and destruction of him who had married and loved her.
I had supposed I would come to the joy of my children and servants;
she, however, the mistress of outrage, has poured a dishonor
over her own head and that of all women who ever come after,
all of the feminine sex, and even the woman of virtue.”
Thus did he speak, and I answered the spirit and said in response then:
“Ah, how terribly Zeus of the far voice hated and harried
Atreus’ line from the first, through the treacherous planning of women.
We for the sake of Helen were dying in thousands at Troas;
Clytemnestra for you, while you were far off, spread out the death-snare.”
Thus did I speak, and at once his spirit responded in answer:
“Therefore never be gentle yourself, even dealing with your wife;
never reveal every word that you know and disclose it before her,
but tell part of the story, and let the remainder be hidden.
Yet no murder will come to Odysseus ever from woman;
far too wise and intelligent-minded within is the daughter
born to Icarius, prudent and thoughtful Penelope, your wife.
Young as a bride was the woman we left when we went to the battle;
there was a boy at her breast, no more than an infant, who doubtless
now takes his seat among men and is counted among them, a fortunate
child! For the father who loves him will see him on coming to homeland,
and he will lovingly clasp his father, the fitting tradition.
But my own wife never allowed me to fill both my eyes there,
looking upon my child, before she destroyed me, his father.
One other thing I will tell you; remember and store it within you:
secretly, never in public, bring your ship into your own
cherished country, since women can never be trusted hereafter.
Come now, tell me this other, and speak with the truth as I ask you:
have you heard whether somewhere my son still dwells with the living,
either in Orchomenus or perhaps in the sandy-soiled Pylos,
or with the lord Menelaus in wide-spreading Sparta?
Surely the noble Orestes has not yet died on the earth-land.”
Thus did he speak, and I answered the spirit and said in response then:
“Atreus’ son, why question me this? I know no report of him,
whether he lives or has died; empty words are an evil to utter.”
So the two of us stood exchanging our sorrowful language,
grieving deeply in heart and letting the great tears fall from us.

Then came the spirit of lord Achilles, the son born of Peleus,
also Patroclus’ spirit, and blameless Antilochus with him,
Ajax as well, who exceeded in beauty and bodily stature
all of the Danaan host but the blameless son born of Peleus.
Then the soul of Aeacus’ swift-footed grandson knew me;
wailing aloud, he spoke, and these words took wing as he uttered:
“Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus endlessly resourceful,
reckless one, what deed even greater than this can your mind plan?
How did you dare come down into Hades’ realm, where the dead men
dwell without understanding, the phantoms of wearied mortals?”
Thus did he speak, and I answered the spirit and said in response then:
“Peleus’ son Achilles, most powerful far of Achaeans,
seeking Tiresias I came from necessity, hoping the prophet
might have a counsel to bring me again to ruggedly coasted Ithaca.
I have not yet gone near to Achaea, nor have I ever
set foot again on my land, but affliction is always around me.
Yet, Achilles, no man was ever more blessed than you in the old days,
neither before nor hereafter; while living, the Argives revered you
just like the gods; and now you rule powerfully here among dead men.
Therefore do not be grieved that you died, Achilles, the godlike.”
Thus did I speak, and at once his spirit responded in answer:
“Shining Odysseus, do not try soothing my death with your language.
I would prefer to be bound to the soil as the serf of another,
even a landless man who possesses a little subsistence,
rather by far than to rule over all of the dead who have wasted.
Come, tell me now of the son I have fathered, the proud-hearted young man:
whether he followed to war so that he might be first in the battle.
Tell me as well of the blameless Peleus, whatever you heard there:
whether he keeps the honor he had in the Myrmidon nation,
or is dishonored throughout both Hellas and Phthia because now
terrible old age captures his hands and his feet and confines him.
I no longer am there as his champion under the sunbeams,
such as I was in the former days when throughout the broad Troas
I killed the best of the armies, defending the people of Argos.
If I could come to the house of my father again for an hour,
such as I was, I would make my rage and unconquerable hands there
dreadful to those who abuse him with force and deny him his honor.”
Thus did he speak, and I answered the spirit and said in response then:
“Nothing concerning the blameless Peleus ever has reached me.
Yet of the son whom you love, Neoptolemus, I can recount you
all of the certain truth, as you ask and desire that I tell it.
I myself in my hollow and balanced vessel conveyed him,
out of the island of Scyros to join strong-greaved Achaeans.
Whenever around Troy’s city we shaped our counsels together,
always he spoke as the first, and his words never missed their intention;
godlike Nestor alone and I could surpass him in counsel.
Whenever we fought on the plain of the Trojans with bronze in our hands there,
never he lingered behind in the crowd and the press of the people,
but ran far out in front, yielding fury to none of the fighters,
slaughtering many men in the terrible shock of the battle.
All of the people he killed I could neither recount to you nor name,
all of the host he destroyed in defending the Argive battalions;
yet he killed such a man as the hero Eurypylus, Telephus’ offspring,
cutting him down with the bronze, and around him his numerous Ceteian
comrades were slaughtered because of the gifts to a woman presented.
Him I beheld as the handsomest man after Memnon, the noble.
When we went down in the wooden horse that Epeius fashioned,
we who were best of the Argives, and all the command was upon me,
either to open the close-packed ambush or shut and restrain it,
then all the other leaders and counselors serving the Danaans
wiped the tears from their eyes, and the limbs under each man were trembling;
never once did my eyes then see your son’s beautiful color
pale in his skin, nor see him wipe tears from his eyelids in terror.
No; he entreated me over and over again, and he never
ceased from his hand on the hilt of the sword and the bronze-heavy spear-shaft,
carrying evil intent for the Trojans within him throughout it.
After we sacked the towering city of Priam in battle,
then he embarked with his share and a beautiful prize of distinction,
wholly unscarred, neither struck by a spear from afar in the battle
nor by the bronze in the close work of war, as happens so often;
Ares in blind fury makes no distinctions among men.”
Thus did I speak; and the spirit of swift-footed Aeacus’ grandson
strode with long steps away through the fields of the pale asphodel plants,
joyful because I had said that his son had excelled among heroes.

All of the rest of the souls of the people who died and departed
stood there in sorrow, and each one asked of the things it held dearest.
Only the spirit of Telamon’s son, lord Ajax, remained far
off, still enraged at the victory I had secured and defeated
him when beside the vessels I argued my claim for the armor
worn by Achilles; his honored mother had offered the prizes,
sons of the Trojans made judgment of us, and Pallas Athena.
Would that I never had won such a victory! Down in the darkness
earth had enclosed such a head for the sake of that armor, lord Ajax,
he who surpassed all Danaans in bodily beauty and war-work,
all but the blameless son of Peleus, Achilles, the godlike.
Him I addressed as I tried to persuade him with honey-sweet language:
“Ajax, child of blameless Telamon, will you not ever,
even in death, put away your anger with me for the cursed
armor? The gods made that armor a plague for the Argive battalions;
such was the tower overthrown when you died. All the people Achaean
mourn for you always, no less than the head of the great lord Achilles,
Peleus’ son. No other is guilty of causing your sorrow,
only great Zeus, who hated the Danaan army of spearmen,
terribly, laying the doom that you suffered upon you in anger.
Come here, lord, so you may hear the word and the speech we would give you.
Conquer your fury and pride in the heart; let your anger be ended.”
Thus did I speak; he answered me nothing, but went on his journey,
joining the other souls in the Erebus of the departed.
There, although in his anger, he still might have spoken toward me,
or I to him; but the heart in the breast that was in me desired
there to behold the spirits of others among the departed.

There I beheld Minos, the splendid son born of great Zeus,
holding his scepter of gold and dispensing the laws to the dead men,
seated, while round him the dead were appealing their cases before him,
some of them seated, some standing throughout Hades’ wide-gated palace.
Then after him I distinguished the giant Orion,
herding together the beasts on the field of the pale asphodel plants,
creatures that he had killed on the lonely mountains in old days;
holding a club made entirely of bronze, forever unbroken.

Tityus also I saw, the child of the glorious Earth-goddess,
lying extended along the ground over nine roods in measure;
vultures, two of them, perched on the sides of his body and tore at
both sides of his liver, their beaks in the caul, while he could not repel them.
This was because he assaulted Zeus’s honored consort, the goddess
Leto, when she went through lovely-dancing Panopeus toward Pytho.

Tantalus also I saw, enduring a terrible torment,
standing in water, the pool lapping up to the point of his chin there;
suffering thirst, he could not take up even one drop for drinking.
Every time that the old man bent in his eagerness, hoping
he might drink, all the water was swallowed away and had vanished;
black earth showed at his feet, made dry by a god in the sunlight.
High-leafed trees above him were pouring their fruit by his forehead,
pears and pomegranates and apple trees shining with fruit in abundance,
figs in their sweetness and olives that flourished in fullest profusion.
Every time that the old man stretched out his hands to take hold of
these, a wind would toss them away toward the dark-shadowed cloud banks.

Sisyphus also I saw, enduring a terrible torment,
grappling a monstrous stone in his arms and attempting to raise it;
bracing his body and straining with powerful hands and with both feet,
upward he pushed the stone to the summit; but every time he
nearly was going to thrust it across, its terrible weight turned,
rolling the shameless boulder again to the plain at the hill-foot.
Then he would struggle again and would push, while sweat from his members
streamed, and the dust from the labor arose from his head in a cloud there.

Then after him I distinguished the powerful Heracles—only
phantom of him, for the man with the deathless immortals is feasting,
filled with delight, and possesses as wife fair-ankled Hebe,
daughter of Zeus the almighty and Hera of gold-glimmering sandals.
Round the phantom the cries of the dead men arose like the cries of
birds as they scatter in terror; like black night he stood there before them,
holding his naked bow in his hand, with the arrow on bowstring,
terribly glaring about like a man who was always about to be shooting.
Dreadful to see was the baldric that crossed the great breadth of his chest there,
belt for the sword made of gold, where marvelous works were depicted:
bears and the wild forest boars and the lions with fire in their eyesight,
battles and combats and violent murders and slaughter of heroes.
May he who put such designs in the belt never fashion another,
he who conceived in his craft and accomplished a wonderful object.
He in his turn recognized me as soon as his eyes fell upon me;
wailing aloud, he spoke, and these words took wing as he uttered:
“Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus endlessly resourceful,
luckless one, are you also enduring the terrible fortune
I had to bear underneath the illuminating rays of the sunlight?
Though I was Zeus’s own son and descended from Cronus, my troubles
never were ended; I served under one who was far my inferior,
and on my shoulders the man laid labors of terrible hardship.
Once he commanded me here to recover the Hound of the death-god,
reckoning no other trial could ever be stronger than this one.
Yet I dragged up the Hound and conveyed him outside of the death-world;
Hermes accompanied me, and Athena, the gray-eyed goddess.”
Thus having spoken, he went to the house of the god Hades once more.
Yet I remained where I stood in the hope some other would come there,
one of the hero men who had died in the generations before us.
Then I would surely have seen the men of the old age I longed for,
Theseus and Pirithous, illustrious children of godhood;
but the innumerable tribes of the dead first gathered around me,
thousands on thousands, with cries no earthly thing could resemble;
pale fear seized me lest queen Persephone send out of Hades
toward me the terrible Gorgon’s head, that monstrous abomination.
Straight to the ship I went and commanded the faithful companions
all to embark and release every cable that fastened the stern there.
Swiftly they came on the ship and sat down by the tholes of the oarlocks;
then did the current’s billow convey her along Ocean’s river,
first under rowing, and afterward borne by a beautiful fair wind.
