The Odyssey — Book 2

The assembly at Ithaca; Penelope's web; Telemachus sails by night.

When Dawn in her earliness rose with her rose-colored fingers,
then from his bed rose up the dear son of steadfast Odysseus.
Dressing himself, he slung the keen sword at once on his shoulder,
under his radiant feet he bound on the beautiful sandals,
out of his chamber he strode, in his face like a godhead immortal.
Straightway he called to the clear-voiced heralds and firmly commanded
all of the long-haired Achaeans be summoned at once to assembly.
Loudly the heralds proclaimed it; the people assembled in haste there.
Then, when the men had assembled and all were collected together,
he made his way to the meeting, a bronze-pointed spear in his palm held,
not by himself, for two swift-footed hounds came along in attendance.
Over his person Athena diffused an ineffable splendor.
All of the people regarded his coming with eyes full of wonder;
down in his father's seat he sat, and the elders made way there.

First of them all to address the assembly was Aegyptius, hero,
bent under age, and in knowledge of numberless matters abundant.
One of his well-loved sons had departed with godlike Odysseus,
sailing in hollow ships to the country of Ilium's horses—
Antiphus, spearman; the savage and pitiless Cyclops had killed him
deep in his cavern and made him the last of the men for his supper.
Three other sons were alive: one mingled among the proud suitors,
named Eurynomus, while two always worked on the lands of their father.
Still he could never forget that lost son, but lamented and mourned him.
Weeping for him, he arose and addressed the assembled Achaeans:

“Hear me, you men who inhabit our Ithaca, hear what I tell you.
Never has one of our councils convened, nor assembly been seated,
since in the hollow ships our noble Odysseus departed.
Who has assembled us now? Upon whom has necessity fallen,
whether he stands with the young generation or those who are elder?
Has he received any word that the army is homeward returning,
something to tell us in public because he was first to discover?
Or does he bring some other affair of the people for counsel?
Surely he seems a good man and a blessed one. May Zeus accomplish
good for the man, whatsoever desire in his heart he is seeking.”

Thus he spoke; and in that word's omen Odysseus' son was rejoicing.
No longer seated, he rose, for desire now impelled him to speak there.
Into the midst he advanced, and a scepter was placed in his right hand
there by Peisenor the herald, a man of considerate judgment.
First to the elder he turned, and he spoke to him openly, saying:

“Elder, the man is not distant; your own eyes shall presently know him.
I have assembled the people, for sorrow has fallen upon me.
No word has come to my ears that the army is homeward returning,
something to tell you in public because I was first to discover,
nor do I bring some other affair of the people for counsel.
Mine is the need, for two great evils have fallen upon my household.
First I have lost my excellent father, the king who before this
governed among you, and gentle he was, as a father is gentle.
Now an affliction far greater will presently shatter my household,
utterly wasting my property, ruining all my subsistence.
Suitors besiege my unwilling mother with harsh importunity,
cherished sons of the men who are here accounted the noblest.
Yet they are fearful of going straight to the house of her father,
Icarius, who could himself set the bridal gifts for his daughter,
giving her hand as he wished to the man who delighted her also.
Rather, they enter our dwelling and haunt it on every occasion,
slaughtering cattle and sheep and the goats that are heavy with fatness,
feasting away and consuming our wine with its fire-colored brightness,
never accounting the cost; and the greater part all goes to ruin.
No man is here such as once was Odysseus, guarding the household.
We have no power to drive this away; from this day thereafter
pitiable men shall we be, and unpracticed in valor and fighting.
I would repel it myself if the strength to repel it were in me!
Deeds past endurance are done here, deeds not decently ordered;
shamefully all of my household is ruined. Be moved to resentment!
Show some respect for yourselves and for neighboring peoples around you,
those who inhabit beside you; and fear the immortals' displeasure,
lest they be angered by evil and turn retribution upon you.
Hear my entreaty by Zeus on Olympus and also by Themis,
goddess who gathers assemblies of mortals and brings their dismissal:
hold yourselves back, my friends, and abandon me here to my sorrow,
wasting away—unless perhaps my father, the noble Odysseus,
once with malicious intent harmed all of the strong-greaved Achaeans,
and in return you maliciously injure the son he has left here,
urging these men. It would surely be better for me and more welcome
if it were you yourselves who consumed all my cattle and treasures.
Were you consuming them, someday repayment might come from the city:
we would pursue you with words through every street of the city,
claiming our property back until everything taken was rendered.
Now you are laying incurable griefs in the depths of my spirit.”

Angrily speaking, he dashed down the scepter and burst into weeping.
Pity took hold of the people and spread through the whole of assembly.
All of the others were silent; and none had the courage to answer
young Telemachus then with an arrogant word of aggression.
Only Antinous answered him there and addressed him directly:

“High-spoken young Telemachus, ungoverned in anger, what language!
Shaming us here, you would gladly attach every fault to the suitors.
None of the suitors, the sons of Achaeans, has caused your affliction;
no, but your own dear mother, incomparable mistress of cunning.
Three whole years have gone past, and the fourth will be soon arriving,
while she deceives the intelligence lodged in Achaean bosoms.
Hope she bestows upon all and to every man offers a promise,
sending her messages out, while her inward intention is other.
This is another deception her heart has contrived and accomplished:
setting a mighty loom in the hall, she began there to weave it,
delicate, wide beyond measure, and straightway addressed us as follows:

‘Young men who court me, because great Odysseus now has been taken,
wait, though you urge on the marriage, until I have finished this weaving;
let not the threads I have spun be abandoned and scattered for nothing.
This is a shroud for the hero Laertes, against that dark morning
when the destructive allotment of death, laying mortals low, takes him.
Then no Achaean woman around us can censure or shame me
if such a man who amassed great wealth should be laid without grave-cloth.’

Thus she addressed us, and easily won our imperious spirits.
Then in the daytime she wove at the loom and accomplished her great web;
then in the nighttime, under the torches, again she unraveled.
Three years long she concealed her deception and fooled the Achaeans.
Yet when the fourth year came, as the seasons revolved in their order,
one of her women revealed it, a servant aware of the secret;
then we discovered her loosening all of the radiant fabric.
So she completed the work by compulsion, although she resisted.
Now hear the suitors' response, so that you in your heart may perceive it,
and so the whole of Achaea may likewise possess the assurance:
send your own mother away and command her to enter a marriage,
taking the man whom her father appoints and who also delights her.
But if she continues distressing the sons of Achaeans much longer,
keeping in mind those gifts above women Athena bestowed her—
knowledge of beautiful handiwork, excellence, generous judgment,
cleverness such as we never have heard of in women before her,
even the fair-haired daughters of old in Achaea's tradition,
Tyro, Alcmene, and Mycene wearing the beautiful headband—
none of those women possessed an intelligence equal to hers now.
Yet in devising this purpose, her judgment has not been becoming.
Just for as long shall they ravenously eat your possessions
while she maintains this intent which the gods are now placing within her.
Great is the glory she wins for herself by her cunning invention,
yet for your house she creates only grief for abundant resources.
We shall not go to our lands, nor depart for another location,
till she selects an Achaean at last and accomplishes marriage.”

Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:

“How, Antinous, could I expel her unwillingly homeward,
she who has borne me and raised me, while somewhere my father is living,
whether alive or now dead? Heavy payment would fall upon me then,
owed to Icarius, should I by my own will send off my mother.
Evil would come from her father, and heaven would add to my sorrows,
since as she left this house, she would call the detestable Furies,
praying against me; and mortals would likewise reproach and revile me.
Therefore the word that you ask me to say shall be spoken out never.
But if your own hearts find any shame in the deeds you accomplish,
go from my halls and prepare other feasts for yourselves and your fellows,
eating your own possessions and visiting house after household.
Yet if you think it is better for you and more profitable also
one man's abundance be wasted away with no restitution,
ravage it all. I shall call on the gods who are living forever,
praying that Zeus may at last bring deeds of requital upon you;
then you shall die in the halls with no blood-price paid in requital.”

Thus spoke Telemachus. Zeus of the thunderous voice sent two eagles,
down from a towering mountain's summit releasing their flight-path.
First, for a while, they flew with the gusting and turbulent wind-stream,
keeping together and stretching their pinions alongside each other.
Then, when they came to the midst of the many-voiced Ithacan council,
wheeling around they beat their wings with a thickening clamor,
glaring on all of the heads underneath, with destruction in eyesight.
Raking each other with talons around the cheeks and the neckbones,
rightward away they darted across all the houses and city.
People were filled with astonishment, seeing the birds with their own eyes,
pondering deep in their hearts what fulfillment the omen portended.
Then the old hero Halitherses arose to address them,
Mastor's son, who surpassed all the men of his own generation,
reading the flight of the birds and explaining the purposes fated.
Wishing them well, he arose and addressed the assembled Achaeans:

“Hear me, you men who inhabit our Ithaca, hear what I tell you—
most of all to the suitors I speak and declare what is coming.
Over their heads an enormous destruction is rolling. Odysseus
shall not remain any longer removed from the land and his loved ones.
Already near us, he plants the beginnings of murder and black death,
meant for these men, every one; and a sorrow shall come upon many
others who live here on Ithaca under the brightness of heaven.
Long before that, let us now take counsel on how to restrain them—
better, let them restrain their own deeds, and the sooner the better.
No inexperienced prophet am I, but accomplished in bird-lore.
All is approaching for him in accordance with what I foretold him,
back when the Argives embarked for the pastures of horses at Ilium,
while in their company went the resourceful and wise Odysseus.
I said, after sufferings many, with all his companions destroyed there,
known to no man, in the twentieth year he would come to his homeland.
All I foretold him before is now reaching its destined fulfillment.”

Then in reply spoke Eurymachus, excellent son born of Polybus:

“Old man, go home and announce your prophecies there to your children,
lest an affliction befall them at some time in days that are coming.
I am a prophet far better than you on the matter before us.
Many the birds that are flying about underneath the sun's brightness;
not every bird is an omen. As for the absent Odysseus,
far off he died, and I wish you had likewise been lost with Odysseus.
Then you would not be delivering prophecies here in abundance,
nor would you sharpen the anger of young Telemachus further,
hoping that he may bestow on your household a gift in repayment.
Now I shall tell you a thing, and I promise its sure execution:
if, with the knowledge of age and the many events you remember,
you should beguile a much younger man and encourage his anger,
first it shall make the result more painful by far for the young man,
though he shall never accomplish a thing on account of your speaking;
then on yourself, old man, we shall fasten a fine whose repayment
galls you in spirit, and bitterly hard shall its punishment hurt you.
Here is the counsel I give Telemachus here in the sight of the people:
let him command his mother to go to the house of her father.
There they can furnish a wedding and give all the bride-gifts appropriate,
many and splendid, the gifts that should follow a cherished daughter.
Not before then do I think that Achaea's sons shall abandon
arduous courtship. No man makes us tremble with fear or anxiety,
not Telemachus, no, notwithstanding his flood of oration;
nor do we value the prophecy, old man, which you are proclaiming,
all unfulfilled, for it only makes you the more to be hated.
Just as before shall his property all be consumed without payment,
while she continues to put the Achaeans off from her marriage.
We shall continue to wait, in contentious pursuit of the woman,
rivals because of her excellence, never pursuing the others,
women whom any of us might appropriately take into marriage.”

Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:

“You, Eurymachus, all of you other imperious suitors,
I shall no longer entreat you or talk of the matter before you.
Now the immortals are perfectly aware, and all the Achaeans.
Come, but provide me a ship that is swift and a crew of companions,
twenty in number, to make my voyage there and return me.
I shall be traveling first to the sands of Pylos, then Sparta,
seeking a word of the homeward return of my long-absent father.
Maybe a mortal can tell me, or I may discover the Rumor
born out of Zeus, which beyond other messengers carries men's tidings.
If I am told that my father is living and making his homeward
journey, although I am ground down by grief, I can bear it a year more.
Yet if I hear he is dead and no longer exists among mortals,
then I shall come once again to the land of my fathers that loves me,
heap up a tomb for my father and furnish the rites that are proper,
many and splendid, and afterward give my mother in marriage.”

Thus he spoke and sat down; then Mentor arose in the council,
Mentor who long had been comrade and friend to the blameless Odysseus.
Sailing away in the ships, Odysseus left him the household,
bidding them all obey the old man, who should safeguard possessions.
Wishing them well, he arose and addressed the assembled Achaeans:

“Hear me, you men who inhabit our Ithaca, hear what I tell you.
Never again let a king with a scepter be gentle and gracious,
kind in his heart, or consider the right and appropriate measure;
rather, forever be cruel in mind and accomplish injustice.
No one remembers the godlike Odysseus now in the country,
none of the people he governed, although as a father he loved them.
Yet I am less indignant against the imperious suitors,
even for violent deeds that they weave in their ill-meaning spirits.
They set their own living heads as a stake while violently eating
all of Odysseus' house in the faith he shall never return here.
No, I am angry at all of the rest of the people—at all you,
sitting in silence and never attacking the suitors with language,
never restraining the few, though the people are many in number.”

Then Leocritus, Evenor's son, in reply spoke against him:

“Mentor, destructive and crazed in your wits, what a word you have spoken,
urging the people to stop us! A struggle is hard to accomplish,
fighting with men over feasting, especially men who outnumber.
Even suppose that Odysseus, Ithacan-born, should come homeward,
finding the lordly suitors at feasting within his own household,
and in his spirit determine to drive all the men from his dwelling:
no joy at all would his wife have then in the man she was longing
ever to welcome; an ugly death he would meet on the threshold,
fighting so many. Your speech has not found an appropriate measure.
Come now, people, disperse, and let each man return to his labor.
Mentor and old Halitherses can hasten the young man's departure,
since from the first they were both the companions and friends of his father.
Yet he will sit for a long time here, I imagine, collecting
news upon Ithaca; never will he bring this journey to action.”

Thus he spoke and at once brought the people's assembly to ending.
Each man scattered away and returned to the house where he lived then;
all of the suitors went into the house of the godlike Odysseus.
But by himself to the sands of the seashore went Telemachus,
washing his hands in the gray-colored sea, and he prayed to Athena:

“Hear me, divinity, you who came yesterday into our household,
bidding me sail in a ship on the face of the mist-covered sea-way,
seeking a word of the homeward return of my long-absent father.
All my designs the Achaeans obstruct and delay from fulfillment,
most of them all these suitors, abusive and swollen with outrage.”

Thus he prayed, and Athena approached and was standing beside him,
having assumed Mentor's body, resembling also his speech-voice.
Raising her voice she addressed him at once with these words that had feathers:

“Young Telemachus, never again shall you prove weak or witless,
if in your spirit is planted the excellent strength of your father—
such was the man in accomplishing action and spoken intention.
Then shall your journey be neither delayed nor deprived of fulfillment.
Yet if you are not truly the son of himself and Penelope,
no hope have I that you ever shall bring your intention to action.
Few are the sons, it is true, who arise to the stature of fathers;
most men are worse than their fathers, and few are the better.
Since you shall never again prove a coward or witless in counsel,
since the intelligence once in Odysseus has not wholly failed you,
hope remains that you surely shall bring this endeavor to action.
Therefore dismiss from your mind all the plans and designs of the suitors,
men without sense, for no sound understanding or justice is in them.
Nothing they know of the death and the darkening doom that is near them,
standing beside them, to sweep them away on a single day's dawning.
Not for much longer shall this expedition of yours be postponed now.
Such an ancestral companion am I, and prepared to assist you:
I shall equip you a fast-running ship and myself shall go with you.
Go to your house and again move among all the arrogant suitors;
gather provisions and pack every portion in fitting containers,
wine in the two-handled jars, barley meal, mortal men's very marrow,
stored in the close-fitted skins. I shall go through the town and assemble
willing companions at once. Many ships in sea-circled Ithaca,
newly constructed and old, are possessed by the island's inhabitants.
I shall inspect them for you and select from among them the finest;
swiftly we then shall equip her and launch on the width of the sea-way.”

Thus spoke Athena, the daughter of Zeus, and no longer did he then,
young Telemachus, linger after the goddess's voice came upon him.
Homeward he went on his way, while his heart in his breast was afflicted.
There he discovered the lordly suitors inside of the palace,
singeing the hogs in the courtyard and stripping the hides from the goat-flesh.
Straight at Telemachus came Antinous, smiling with laughter,
took the young man by the hand and addressed him aloud by his name there:

“High-spoken young Telemachus, ungoverned in anger, no longer
trouble your spirit with evil designs or with angry expressions.
Come now, eat and drink at my side in the way you did formerly.
All of these needs the Achaeans shall gladly supply and accomplish,
giving a ship and selected companions, that sooner you come to
sacred Pylos and gather a word of your excellent father.”

Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:

“How, Antinous, could I among you insolent suitors
eat at my ease and in silence enjoy the repose of a banquet?
Was it not plenty that all this while, you suitors, were cutting
all my possessions apart, many excellent things, while a child still?
Now I am grown, and by hearing the speeches of others have learned things,
while in the depths of my body my courage is rising and swelling.
I shall endeavor to fasten a doom of destruction upon you,
whether I travel to Pylos or stay in the land of my fathers.
Go I shall, and the journey I speak of shall not be an empty
errand—a passenger, since I possess neither ship nor companions,
just as your lordships no doubt have decided was more to your profit.”

Thus he spoke and easily wrenched his hand from Antinous' clutches.
Through the house, all of the suitors attended the work of the banquet,
mocking the young man and throwing abusive expressions upon him.
Thus would one arrogant youth make a speech to the rest of his fellows:

“Clearly young Telemachus plans the destruction and death of us all now!
Either from sandy Pylos he shall bring back men to avenge him,
or out of Sparta, because of the terrible zeal that impels him.
Maybe he means to go into the rich-soiled country of Ephyra,
bringing back poisons that waste human life, to be cast in the wine bowl,
killing us all when the wine has been mixed and distributed to us.”

Thus would another arrogant youth make a speech to his fellows:

“Who can be certain? Perhaps, having boarded the hollow-built vessel,
far from his people he too shall be lost in his wandering, like Odysseus.
Then our labor and trouble would surely be doubled in measure:
all his possessions would have to be shared and divided among us;
then we should give his mother the house, and the man who shall wed her.”

Thus they spoke, but he entered the lofty room of his father,
spacious and high in the roof, where bronze lay heaped up with treasure,
gold and clothing in chests, and abundance of fragrant olive oil.
There great vessels were standing that held old wine in their bellies,
sweet to be drunk, with the pure and divine-tasting drink sealed within them,
set in a row by the wall for the day when Odysseus, suffering
many afflictions, might nevertheless come again to his household.
Closely constructed doors had been fitted and locked on the chamber,
double in thickness; and night and day an intelligent woman
guarded it all with the deep understanding contained in her spirit,
old Eurycleia, the daughter of Ops, who was born from Peisenor.
Calling her into the storeroom, young Telemachus then said:

“Nurse, come now, and draw some wine for me into the two-handled vessels,
sweet and the finest in flavor, excepting the portion reserved there,
held while you think of that ill-fated man, if Odysseus somehow,
Zeus-born, comes home after slipping away from destruction and death-doom.
Fill up twelve for me now and provide every vessel a cover.
Then pour barley meal for me into the close-fitted leather,
twenty whole measures of barley grain pulverized under millstones.
Keep this alone in your knowledge and leave it collected together.
Evening shall see me come for it all when the hour has arrived and
Mother has gone to her upper apartment, preparing for slumber.
I shall be traveling first to the sands of Pylos, then Sparta,
seeking a word of my dear father's homecoming, if I can hear one.”

Thus he spoke, and Eurycleia, his nurse from his infancy, wailed then,
grieving aloud and addressing him straightway with words that had feathers:

“Why has this thought, dear child, arisen inside of your spirit?
Where can you travel across the immeasurable breadth of the earth now,
only and well-beloved son? Far from home he has perished,
Zeus-born great Odysseus, somewhere in lands of the strangers.
Those men, as soon as you leave, will fashion behind you their evils,
killing you under deception and sharing your property with them.
Stay with possessions that here are your own and remain in your household.
No need is laid upon you to be hurt on the barren sea, wandering.”

Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:

“Courage, my nurse; for the purpose is made in alliance with godhead.
Swear to me now that you shall not tell my dear mother about it,
not till the eleventh day has arrived, or the twelfth in its order,
or till she misses me first and discovers herself my departure,
lest she should damage her beautiful skin with lamenting and weeping.”

Thus he spoke; and the old woman swore the great oath of immortals.
Then, when the oath had been sworn and its words brought at last to completion,
straightway she drew off the wine for his journey in two-handled vessels,
poured out the barley meal for him into the close-fitted leather.
Young Telemachus went to the hall and again joined the suitors.
Then the gray-eyed goddess Athena conceived a new purpose.
Taking the form of Telemachus, throughout the town she went roaming,
standing beside every man and addressing him clearly with orders,
bidding him come in the evening and gather beside the swift vessel.
Then from Noemon, the splendid son of the wise man Phronius,
she asked a swift-running ship, which he willingly promised to lend her.
Down went the sun at the last, and the roadways were shadowed in darkness.
Then she drew down the swift ship and set in its well-fashioned body
all of the gear that is commonly carried by ships with good benches.
Close to the harbor's edge she moored her; courageous companions around her
gathered as one, while the goddess awakened the heart of each sailor.
Then the gray-eyed goddess Athena conceived a new purpose.
Off she departed and entered the house of the godlike Odysseus.
There she diffused sweet sleep on the suitors and clouded their senses,
striking the cups from their hands while they drank and bewildering all of them.
Through the town they staggered to sleep, no longer remaining
seated at feasting, for slumber was falling across their eyelids.
Then to Telemachus spoke the gray-eyed goddess Athena,
calling him out to the front of the well-built halls of his household,
having assumed Mentor's body, resembling also his speech-voice:

“Young Telemachus, already your strong-greaved comrades are seated,
holding the oars in their hands and awaiting your word of departure.
Come, let us go, and no longer delay the beginning of travel.”

Thus having spoken, Athena, the goddess, proceeded before him,
rapidly, while Telemachus followed the steps of the goddess.
Then, when the two had come down to the ship and the shore of the sea-way,
there they discovered the long-haired companions upon the sand-beach,
and the sacred strength of Telemachus spoke and addressed them:

“Come now, companions, and let us bring down our provisions; already
all are collected together inside of the hall. Of our purpose
Mother knows nothing, nor any of our women, excepting one only.”

Thus having spoken, he led them away, and the others attended.
Carrying everything down, they stored it inside the well-benched vessel,
just as the well-loved son of Odysseus firmly commanded.
Young Telemachus boarded the vessel, Athena before him;
down in the stern of the vessel she sat, and alongside the goddess
young Telemachus sat. The companions released the stern-cables,
boarded the ship in their turn, and took up their seats at the oarlocks.
Gray-eyed Athena provided a wind that would follow behind them,
fresh-blowing West Wind, singing aloud on the wine-dark sea-way.
Young Telemachus called to his comrades and firmly commanded
all lay hold on the tackle; and gladly they heard and obeyed him.
Raising the mast made of pine, they set it inside of the mast-box,
stood it erect and secured it with forestays fastened before it,
then by the well-twisted ox-hide ropes they hauled up the white sail.
Wind in the sail's middle bellied it out, while the dark-colored wave-stream
loudly around the keel hissed as the ship made her passage upon it.
Running along on the face of the waves, she accomplished her pathway.
Then, when the tackle was fastened throughout the swift black-hulled vessel,
high they erected the wine bowls, filled to the brim and then crowned them,
pouring libations to gods everlasting, who live without dying,
most of them all to the gray-eyed daughter of Zeus they made offering.
All the night through and beyond into Dawn the ship clove the sea-way.
