The Odyssey — Book XXIV

The second Nekyia; Laertes and the trees; the peace of Ithaca.

Hermes the Cyllenian summoned the souls and called them,
souls of the suitor men; and he held in his hands the fair wand,
lovely and golden, the wand with which he bewitches men's vision,
whom he will, and again wakes others asleep from their slumber;
with it he stirred them and led, and they followed behind with thin squeaking.
As when bats in the depths of a marvellous cavern are flitting,
squeaking as ever they wheel, when one has dropped from the cluster
hanging there from the rock, and they cling to one another,
so they went with shrill crying together; and Hermes before them,
Hermes the kindly, led down by the mouldering shadowy pathways.
Past the streams of Ocean they went, and the White Rock beside them,
past the gates of the Sun and past the land of the Dream-folk,
then in haste they arrived at the meadow of pale asphodel there,
where the souls make their home, the phantoms of mortals outwearied.
There they found the soul of Achilles, scion of Peleus,
and of Patroclus, and blameless Antilochus also,
and of Ajax, who was best in beauty and stature
of all the rest of the Danaans after the noble son of Peleus.
These stood there about Achilles; and close beside them there also
came the soul of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, in sorrow,
grieving; around him the rest were assembled, all those who beside him
died in the house of Aegisthus and met their destiny with him.
First then the soul of the grandson of Aeacus addressed him:
“Son of Atreus, we used to declare that Zeus of the bright bolt
loved you beyond all hero men all through the days of your lifetime,
seeing you ruled over many and mighty men as their master
there in the land of the Trojans, where we Achaeans bore anguish.
Yet even for you it seems the destructive fate was appointed
early to stand near by, that fate no mortal escapes from.
If only, receiving the honor of which you were lord and possessor,
there in the land of the Trojans you had met death and your doom then;
then all the Panchaeans would have built up a tomb to your glory,
and for your son thereafter you would have won mighty honor.
But now it was fated that death most pitiful should ensnare you.”
Then in turn the soul of the son of Atreus addressed him:
“Fortunate son of Peleus, Achilles, peer of immortals,
you who died there in Troy, far off from Argos; around you
other men fell, the best of the sons of Trojans and Argives,
battling over your body; while you in the whirling dust eddies
lay there immense in your might, forgetful now of horsemanship.
We for our part fought on through the whole day long, nor ever
would we have ceased from the war, had not Zeus with a storm-wind checked us.
But when we had brought you out of the battle and back to the shipping,
then on a bier we laid you, and washed your beautiful body
with warm water and oil; and around you many the Danaans
poured out hot tears and sheared from their heads the hair in their grieving.
Then from the sea came your mother with the immortal sea women,
hearing the message; and over the sea there rose an amazing
cry, and beneath it a shudder seized hold of all the Achaeans.
Then they would have leaped up and gone to the hollow ships in panic,
had not a man held them back, one knowing much from old seasons,
Nestor, whose counsel before had always appeared the best to us.
He with kind thought for them stood forth in assembly and told them:
“Stay, Argives; do not flee, young sons of the Achaean people.
This is his mother who comes from the sea with immortal sea women,
coming to look on the face of her son now stricken by death.”
So he spoke, and the great-hearted Achaeans checked their terror.
Then about you there stood the daughters of the Ancient of Ocean,
mourning in piteous grief, and they put on you deathless raiment.
Then the nine Muses all in succession with beautiful voices
sang the lament; and no man of the Argives then would you notice
free of his tears, for so piercing the clear-voiced Muse had awakened.
Seventeen nights and days alike we mourned you together,
both we immortal gods and mortals that die upon earth here;
but on the eighteenth day we consigned you to fire, and around you
many fat sheep we slaughtered, and shambling cattle with curved horns.
You were burned in the garments of gods, with abundant ointment,
and with sweet honey; and many Achaean heroes around you
marched in their armor about the pyre while it burned all around you,
footmen and horsemen alike; and a great uproar arose there.
But when at last the flame of Hephaestus had wholly consumed you,
then at dawn, Achilles, we gathered your white bones together
into unmixed wine and oil; and your mother had given
a golden two-handled urn, a gift, she said, of Dionysus,
and a work of Hephaestus, the god renowned far and widely.
Therein lie now your white bones, illustrious great Achilles,
mingled with dead Patroclus, the son of Menoetius,
and apart those of Antilochus, whom beyond all companions
most you honored of all after dead Patroclus had left you.
Over them then we heaped a great and a blameless tomb mound
we, the holy host of the Argive men skilled with the war-spear,
there on a jutting headland above the broad Hellespont,
so from the sea it might be visible far off to mortals,
men who are living now and the men who hereafter shall be.
Then your mother, petitioning the gods, sought prizes of splendor,
set them there in the midst of the games for the best of Achaeans.
Truly by now you have stood at the funeral contests of many
heroes, whenever a king has died and the young men about him
gird themselves and make themselves ready to strive for the prizes;
yet your heart would have marveled most if you had looked on those contests,
what surpassingly splendid prizes the goddess set out there
in your honor, silver-footed Thetis; for dear were you to the gods all.
Thus not even in death did you lose your name, but forever
noble your glory shall be among all mankind, Achilles.
But for myself, what delight was there for me, after I finished the war-web?
For on my homeward way Zeus planned a pitiful ruin,
death at the hands of Aegisthus and my own accursed wife.”
Thus they spoke such things in turn, addressing each other,
when near to them came the guide, the slayer of Argus,
leading the souls of the suitors whom great Odysseus had mastered.
And in amazement the pair came straight toward them when I saw them.
Then the soul of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, knew him,
the dear son of Melaneus, renowned Amphimedon;
for in Ithaca once he had lived as his guest-friend in his household.
To him first spoke out the soul of the son of Atreus:
“Amphimedon, what befell you, that under the dark earth you entered,
all of you chosen men and all in the same bloom of your manhood?
A man would not choose better throughout a whole city of people.
Was it Poseidon who broke you aboard your ships on the seaways,
stirring against you harsh winds and the long heave of billows?
Or did hostile men destroy you somewhere ashore on the mainland
while you were driving off cattle, or beautiful flocks of sheep there,
or while in battle for city and women you fought to the finish?
Tell me, for I am asking; for I declare I was your guest-friend.
Do you not remember when I came there into your dwelling,
urging Odysseus with godlike Menelaus beside me
to go with us to Ilium in the well-benched vessels?
A full month passed by while we traversed the wide sea altogether,
laboring hard to persuade Odysseus, sacker of cities.”
Then in return the soul of Amphimedon answered him:
“Most glorious son of Atreus, lord of men Agamemnon,
all these things I remember, Zeus-nurtured king, as you tell them;
and to you I shall tell very clearly and truly the whole tale,
the evil end of our death, and how it came to completion.
We were courting the wife of Odysseus, long absent;
and she neither refused outright the hateful marriage nor ended it,
all the while preparing for us death and black destruction,
but in her mind she devised this other stratagem also:
setting a great loom up in the halls, she wove at her weaving,
delicate-threaded and wide beyond measure; and quickly she told us:
“Young men, my suitors, since noble Odysseus has perished,
wait, though eager to wed me, until I finish this fabric,
lest the threads of my spinning should perish and come to no purpose,
as a burial shroud for the hero Laertes, against the hour
when the deadly fate of long-stretching death shall overtake him,
lest some Achaean woman somewhere among all the people
blame me if one who won much wealth should lie there without a death-shroud.”
So she spoke, and our proud heart within us was won to persuasion.
Then by day she would weave at the great loom through all the daylight,
but by night she unraveled it, once she had set by the torches.
Thus for three years she concealed it by guile and persuaded Achaeans;
but when the fourth year came on and the seasons arrived with it,
as the months waned away and many long days were accomplished,
then indeed one of her women spoke out, who knew of it clearly,
and we found her unraveling there the splendid weaving.
Thus she finished it then, though unwilling, compelled by necessity.
But when she showed us the cloth, after weaving the great web,
and after washing it, shining like sunlight or like the moonlight,
then at that very moment some evil divinity brought great Odysseus
from somewhere to the edge of the land where the swineherd was dwelling.
There too came the dear son of godlike Odysseus,
coming from sandy Pylos aboard his black ship returning.
And the two of them, devising evil death for the suitors,
came to the famous town; and truly Odysseus came later,
while Telemachus went first before him leading the way there.
Then the swineherd led him, with poor clothes wrapped on his body,
like to a beggar in misery, and like to an old man,
leaning upon a staff, and mean clothes hung on his body.
None of us could discern him for the man that he truly was there,
when he appeared among us so suddenly, not even the elder men.
No, we kept on assailing him, hurling foul words and missiles.
Yet for a time in his own great halls he endured and was steadfast,
pelted with blows and taunts, with a heart that was patient in suffering.
But when the mind of Zeus of the aegis lifted and roused him,
then with Telemachus he took up the beautiful armor,
carried it into the chamber, and fastened the doors with the bolts there.
Then by the craft in his heart he instructed his own dear wife there
to set for the suitors the bow and the gray iron axes,
for us doomed men a contest of pain and beginning of slaughter.
Not a man there among us could draw on the string of that great bow,
no, we fell very far from the mark; we were wholly deficient.
But when at last to the hands of Odysseus the great bow had come there,
then all of us shouted together and cried out against it,
not to hand him the bow, not even if much he should ask for it;
only Telemachus there kept urging him on and commanding.
Then in his hand he received it, resourceful enduring Odysseus,
and with ease he strung the great bow, and shot through the iron.
Then to the threshold he strode, and poured out the swift-flying arrows,
glaring around him in dread, and he struck down lordly Antinous.
After him then at the rest he kept shooting his arrows of anguish,
aiming straight before him; and they kept falling in heaps all around us.
It was plain that one of the gods was standing beside them in battle;
for then with fury they swept through the hall and struck all before them,
killing to right and to left, and hideous groaning arose there
as heads were battered; the whole floor steamed with the blood of the fallen.
So we perished, Agamemnon; and even now in this moment
our bodies lie without care in the halls of Odysseus.
For our dear ones at home in the house of each man do not know yet,
those who would wash from our wounds the black clotting blood that is on us
and lay us out with their mourning; for that is the due of the dead men.”
Then in reply the spirit of Atreus' son spoke and addressed him:
“Blessed son of Laertes, Odysseus of many devices,
surely with great excellence you won for yourself such a woman.
How good was the mind in blameless Penelope's bosom,
daughter of Icarius, how well she remembered Odysseus,
her own wedded husband; therefore her glory shall never perish,
no, for her excellence the immortals shall fashion a lovely
song upon earth among men for circumspect Penelope.
Not like the daughter of Tyndareus, who devised evil actions,
slaying her own wedded lord; and hateful song shall attend her
out among humankind, and she will bring grievous reproach down
upon all womankind, even upon one who acts with goodness.”
So the two of them spoke such words to one another, conversing,
standing there in the house of Hades, beneath the earth's hidden places.
But the others, when down from the city they came, very quickly
reached the fair well-fashioned farm of Laertes, which once he
gained for himself after long toil and labor in plenty.
There was his house, and around it on every side were the shelters
where the serving men ate and sat and also took sleep there,
thralls of necessity, who worked at the things that he loved there.
In the house there was also an old Sicilian serving-woman;
carefully she tended the old man there on the farmland,
far from the city. There Odysseus spoke to the thralls and his dear son:
“Now you others go into the well-built house all together,
and for our supper at once sacrifice the best of the swine there.
I for my part will make trial now of my father and test him,
whether he will know me and mark me well with his own eyes,
or fail to know me, his son, after so long a time in absence.”
So he spoke, and into the hands of the thralls he gave over the war-gear.
Then they went quickly on toward the house; but noble Odysseus
moved more near to the orchard rich in fruit, with testing in mind there.
Yet descending into the great orchard he found no Dolius,
neither any of the thralls nor sons; for they all had gone outward
gathering stones for a fence to wall in the orchard and vineyard,
and the old man himself was leading the way for the others.
So he found his father alone in the well-worked orchard there standing,
digging around a young plant; and he wore a befouled tunic,
patched and shabby; and round his shins he had fastened of oxhide
sewn leggings, to keep from the scratches; and over his hands too
he had gloves because of the thorns; and over his head he was wearing
a cap of goatskin, feeding the grief that swelled in his spirit.
But when enduring noble Odysseus had marked him and known him,
worn by old age, with the weight of heavy grief in his spirit,
standing beneath a tall pear tree he let the tears fall downward.
Then he pondered this way and that in his mind and his great heart,
whether to kiss his father and clasp him close in his arms there,
and to tell him all, how he had come and reached his own country,
or to inquire into all and test him in every particular.
As he turned it in mind, this course appeared to him better:
first with words of mocking edge to make full trial and test him.
Thinking on this, noble Odysseus went straight up before him.
There he was, head bowed down, digging around a young tree-root;
standing close beside him, his glorious son then addressed him:
“Old sir, no want of skill is on you in tending an orchard;
truly your care is good; there is nothing at all here neglected,
neither a plant nor fig tree, nor vine, nor olive either,
neither a pear tree nor any bed in the garden untended.
Yet I will tell you one thing more, and do not take it in anger:
you yourself are not well cared for, but with your old age upon you
wretchedly you are begrimed, and your clothing is mean and dishonored.
It is not surely for sloth that your master neglects you;
neither does anything slavish appear when one looks at you,
neither in shape nor stature; you seem like a man who is kingly.
Such indeed you would seem, if you bathed and partook of your supper,
and then lay down upon softness; for this is the due of the old ones.
But come now, tell me this, and recount it exactly and truly:
whose slave are you among men, and whose orchard are you tending?
And tell me this as well in truth, so that I may know clearly,
whether in fact we have come to this Ithaca, as was told me
by a man whom I met just now as I came here upon the roadway,
not very sound in his wits, since he had not the patience in him
either to tell me all things or listen through to my question
touching a guest-friend of mine, whether still he is living and present
or by now he is dead and gone to the house of Hades below.
For I will tell you this; now attend and listen unto me:
once in my own dear fatherland country I welcomed a certain
man who had come to my house, and never yet any other
stranger from far away came as dear to my dwelling as he did.
He declared that his race was from Ithaca, and he told me
Laertes son of Arcesius was his father by birthright.
Him I led to my house, and I gave him a generous welcome,
loving him warmly and well, for there was abundance within doors,
and I bestowed on him gifts of friendship, as was fitting:
seven whole talents I gave him of gold well wrought by craftsmen,
and I gave him a mixing bowl all silver, flowered with ornament,
twelve plain cloaks, and as many rugs and spread-coverings with them,
just so many fair mantles besides, and tunics upon them,
and apart from these, women, four, who knew blameless handiwork,
shapely and skilled, and of these he might choose whichever he wished to.”
Then his father replied to him, shedding tears as he answered:
“Stranger, indeed you have reached the land for which you are asking,
but over it now violent men and reckless ones hold sway.
Therefore the gifts that you gave him, bestowing ten thousand favors,
all were in vain. If only you had found him here in Ithaca
living, then surely with gifts in return he would have dismissed you
well, and with noble guest-right; for so it is right with the giver.
But come now, tell me this, and recount it exactly and truly:
what year is this from the time when you welcomed that stranger,
your guest-friend, that unhappy man, my son, if ever I had one,
luckless child, whom somewhere far from his friends and his fatherland country
either fish in the sea have devoured, or else upon dry land
he became spoil for beasts and birds; and neither his mother
wrapped and lamented him, nor his father, we who begot him;
neither his richly dowered wife, wise-hearted Penelope,
wailed for her own dear husband upon his bed, as was fitting,
drawing his eyes shut down; for this is the due of the departed.
And tell me this as well in truth, so that I may know clearly:
who and from where are you among men? Where is your city and parentage?
Where does the swift ship stand that conveyed you hitherward
and your godlike companions? Or did you come as a passenger
on another man’s ship, and they put you ashore and departed?”
Then resourceful Odysseus in turn made answer and told him:
“Then indeed I will tell you all things exactly and truly.
I am from Alybas, where my renowned house has its dwelling;
I am son of Apheidas, of lordly Polypemon descended;
and my own name is Eperitus. Yet some spirit or other
drove me astray from Sicania to come here against my wishing.
My ship stands yonder away from the town by the edge of the farmland.
But as for Odysseus, this now is the fifth turning year-sum
since he went away from there and departed out of my country,
luckless man. Yet indeed there were favorable birds for his journey,
birds on the right, and I rejoiced in them as I sent him onward,
and he too was glad as he went; and the heart in us both was still hoping
we would meet again in guest-friendship and exchange splendid presents.”
So he spoke, and a black cloud of sorrow enveloped the old man.
Then with both of his hands he took up the dark sooty dust there
and poured it over his white head, groaning heavily, deeply.
Then the spirit within Odysseus was stirred; through his nostrils
sharp pain struck as he looked on his father beloved before him.
Then he sprang and embraced him and kissed him, and thus he addressed him:
“Father, why, I am this man myself, whom you have been seeking,
home in the twentieth year I have come to the land of my fathers.
But hold back now from weeping and tearful lamentation.
For I will tell you the truth; yet even so we must hurry:
I have slain the suitors inside our own halls and chambers,
making them pay for their soul-wounding shame and their evil.”
Then in return wise Laertes answered and spoke to him:
“If indeed you are Odysseus, my son, and have come here,
tell me a sign now, plain to be known, so I may believe you.”
Then resourceful Odysseus answered him, saying:
“First of all, mark this scar here clearly with your own eyesight,
where on Parnassus a boar drove in on me with his white tusk
when I had gone there; for you had sent me, and my honored
mother as well, to Autolycus, dear father of my mother,
so I might receive the gifts he promised me here and assented.
But come, let me also recount the trees in the thriving orchard
which once you gave to me, when I kept begging for each one,
being a child and following you through the garden behind you;
there we passed among them, and you named and told them all to me.
Thirteen pear trees you gave me, and ten apple trees also,
and forty fig trees; and of the vine rows you named me
fifty to give, and each one had its season of vintage;
there on the vines all manner of clusters were hanging,
whenever the seasons of Zeus came pressing them down from above.”
So he spoke, and the old man's knees and dear heart were loosened,
for he knew the sure signs Odysseus had clearly recounted.
Round his beloved son he flung both arms in embrace there;
and great-enduring noble Odysseus caught him while swooning.
But when again he drew breath and his spirit came back to his bosom,
then once more in reply he addressed him and answered:
“Father Zeus, then surely the gods still dwell on Olympus,
if in truth the suitors have paid for their reckless outrage.
Yet now in my heart I terribly fear that at any moment
all the Ithacans here will come against us, and they will
send out tidings abroad to the towns of the Cephallenians.”
Then resourceful Odysseus answered and said to him:
“Take heart; do not let these things be matters of care in your spirit.
Come, let us go to the house, which lies close here by the orchard.
There I sent on ahead Telemachus, and the cowherd,
and the swineherd, so they might prepare us supper with all speed.”
So after speaking thus, they went to the beautiful dwelling.
And when now they arrived at the well-inhabited homestead,
there they found Telemachus, and the cowherd, and swineherd
carving abundant meat and mixing the gleaming dark wine.
Meanwhile in his own house great-hearted Laertes was tended:
a Sicilian handmaid bathed him and rubbed him with olive,
and then around him she cast a beautiful cloak; and Athena
standing close by made strong the limbs of the shepherd of people,
and she made him greater to see, and more stalwart than formerly.
Out from the bath he stepped, and his dear son marveled at seeing
face to face how like to the immortal gods he had become there;
then calling to him he addressed him with winged words, saying:
“Father, surely one of the gods who are everlasting
made you better to look on in stature and beauty of body.”
Then in return wise Laertes answered and spoke to him:
“If only, father Zeus, and Athena, and lord Apollo,
such as I was when I took Nericus, strongly founded,
there on the cape of the mainland, as lord of Cephallenians,
such a man I had been but yesterday in our own halls,
with armor upon my shoulders, to stand by you and defend you
against the suitor men; then many of them I would have
loosened the knees in the house, and your own heart would have rejoiced there.”
Thus then the two of them spoke such things to one another.
But when the others had ceased from labor and made ready the banquet,
then they sat down in order on benches and chairs in a row there.
And just as they were setting their hands to the meal before them,
there came old Dolius near, and with him the sons of the old man,
wearied out from the field work, because his mother had called them,
the old Sicilian woman who raised them and lovingly tended
him, the old man, ever since crushing old age overtook him.
And when they saw Odysseus and marked him there in their spirits,
they stood in the hall astonished; but then Odysseus
greeted them kindly and spoke to them, fastening speech on them:
“Old sir, sit down to supper, and let your amazement be ended.
Long have we waited here in the hall, desiring our supper,
holding back from the meal and expecting you always to enter.”
So he spoke, and Dolius came straight on, with both hands extended;
and Odysseus grasped his hand and kissed him there at the wrist joint.
Then calling to him he addressed him with winged words, saying:
“Dear friend, since you have returned, long hoped for among us servants,
though we had given up hope; yet the gods themselves brought you homeward.
Hail, and rejoice exceedingly; may the gods grant you blessings.
But tell me this thing truly, so that I may know it clearly:
does circumspect Penelope already know of it,
that you have come home here, or shall we send her a herald?”
Then resourceful Odysseus answered and said to him:
“Old man, she knows already. Why should you trouble with this matter?”
So he spoke, and again he sat on the well-polished stool there.
So likewise the sons of Dolius gathered round noble Odysseus,
greeting him warmly with words, and clasping his hands in their own hands,
then in due order sat down beside Dolius, their father.
Thus they in the halls were intent on the meal before them.
But Rumor the messenger quickly went through the whole city,
telling abroad the suitors’ hateful death and destruction.
And they all heard together, and came from this side and that side,
groaning and lamenting before the house of Odysseus.
Out from the hall each household bore its dead and buried them;
but the others, from outlying towns, they sent to his own home,
setting each man on the fishers’ swift and seafaring vessels;
and they themselves went massed to the place of assembly, hearts grieving.
But when they had gathered and all were together assembled,
then among them Eupeithes rose up and addressed them:
for unbearable grief for his son lay deep in his spirit,
for Antinous, whom glorious Odysseus first had slaughtered.
For him shedding tears he spoke in the gathering and said this:
“Friends, this man has devised a great outrage against the Achaeans.
Some with his ships he led away, many and excellent fighters,
and he lost the curved ships, and he destroyed all the people.
Then coming back he killed the best by far of the Cephallenians.
Come then, before he can quickly get clear to sandy Pylos,
or even to shining Elis, where the Epeians are rulers,
let us go; else afterward we shall be bowed down forever.
For this will be shame for men of later ages to hear of,
if we do not avenge the slayers of sons and of brothers.
For me there would not be sweetness at all in the life left before me,
but I would die with all speed and join those already perished.
But let us go, before they cross the strait and escape to the mainland.”
So he spoke, shedding tears, and pity seized all the Achaeans.
Then Medon came near to them, and the godlike singer with him,
out of the halls of Odysseus, since sleep had now released them.
In their midst they stood; and astonishment seized every hearer.
Then Medon, understanding wise thoughts, spoke out among them:
“Hear me now, men of Ithaca; for not without the gods’ will
did Odysseus devise and accomplish these deeds in the palace.
I myself saw an immortal god, who there beside Odysseus
stood very near, and in all things seemed to be Mentor.
Now this immortal god would appear before Odysseus,
giving him courage, and now through the hall would drive the suitors,
rushing among them; and close-packed they tumbled and fell there.”
So he spoke, and beneath pale fear all of them were afflicted.
Then the old hero Halitherses spoke forth among them,
son of Mastor; for he alone saw before and behind them.
He with good will toward them addressed the assembly and said this:
“Hear me now, men of Ithaca, and heed what I tell you.
By your own wickedness, friends, these things have come into being.
You would not listen to me, nor yet to Mentor, people’s shepherd,
when we said you must make your sons desist from their folly,
they who committed a monstrous deed in their evil presumption,
wasting the substance and bringing dishonor on the wife of
one of the noblest of men; for they thought he would not come homeward.
So now let it stand as it is; obey what I counsel.
Let us not go, lest someone discover self-chosen destruction.”
So he spoke, but they sprang up with a great cry, more than half of them;
yet the rest remained there gathered together in that place.
For in their hearts his word did not please them; rather Eupeithes
they obeyed, and at once they made haste to get to their armor.
But when they had put upon their flesh the glittering bronze there,
they all assembled in front of the broad-wayed city together.
And among them Eupeithes led on, in his own great folly;
for he thought he would avenge the killing done to his son, yet never
was he destined to return, but there to encounter his death-spirit.
Then Athena addressed Zeus, the son of Cronos, and said this:
“Father of us all, son of Cronos, highest of all the mighty,
tell me, as I ask you, what plan in your heart are you hiding?
Will you stir up again evil war and terrible battle,
or instead will you establish friendship between both parties?”
Then Zeus the cloud-gatherer answered her and said to her:
“My child, why do you ask me of this and inquire into it?
Was it not you yourself who shaped this counsel in your thinking,
that Odysseus on coming home should exact payment from those men?
Do as ever you please; but I shall tell you what is the fitting.
Now when godlike Odysseus has punished the suitors,
let them cut binding oaths, and let him be king forever;
and let us cast a forgetting on slaughter of children
and of brothers; and let them keep loving each other
just as before, and let there be wealth and peace in abundance.”
So he spoke, and he roused Athena, already eager before this;
down she darted away from the peaks of Olympus.
Now when they had put from them desire for honey-sweet eating,
then among them godlike Odysseus, long-suffering, started:
“Let some man go outside and see if they now are approaching.”
So he spoke, and the son of Dolius went, as he bade him;
going he stood on the threshold, and saw that they all were close by;
quickly then he addressed Odysseus with winged words, saying:
“Here they are now, close at hand; but let us arm all the faster.”
So he spoke, and they sprang to their feet and put on their armor,
four men around Odysseus, and six of the sons of Dolius;
and with them Laertes and Dolius also armed themselves,
though they were gray-haired men, yet still by necessity fighters.
But when they had clothed all their flesh in the gleaming bronze armor,
then they opened the doors and went out, and Odysseus led them.
Then there came close by them Athena, the daughter of Zeus, there,
like to Mentor in build and in voice altogether.
Seeing her, then godlike Odysseus, long-suffering, rejoiced there,
and at once to Telemachus, his own dear son, he addressed him:
“Telemachus, now you yourself will know this, entering battle,
where men fight face to face, and the best men are sifted and chosen:
never disgrace the line of your fathers, who long before this time
have surpassed all the earth in valor and manly courage.”
Then in turn wise Telemachus answered his father and said this:
“You will see, if you wish it, dear father, with this heart within me,
I shall not bring disgrace on your line, as you tell me.”
So he spoke, and Laertes rejoiced and spoke out a saying:
“What a day this indeed is for me, dear gods; I am joyful.
Son and son's son are contending together concerning prowess.”
Then standing beside him gray-eyed Athena addressed him:
“Son of Arceisius, dearest by far of all my companions,
pray to the gray-eyed maiden and Zeus who is father above her,
then with a great swing hurl forth your spear that casts a long shadow.”
So she spoke, and Pallas Athena breathed great strength within him.
Then he prayed to the daughter of Zeus the mighty in heaven,
and with a great swing hurled forth his spear that casts a long shadow,
and he struck Eupeithes straight through his bronze-cheeked helmet.
Yet the spear was not held by the helm, but the bronze point drove through it;
down he crashed as he fell, and his armor clattered upon him.
Then on the front fighters Odysseus fell, and his glorious son too,
striking with swords and with spears that were sharpened at both ends.
Then indeed they would have destroyed them all and deprived them of homecoming,
had not Athena, the child of Zeus who bears the aegis,
cried out with her voice and held back all the people together:
“Hold from the painful war, men of Ithaca, hold now,
so that with no more bloodshed you may be parted most quickly.”
So spoke Athena, and upon them all pale fear seized hold then;
from their hands, in their terror, their weapons all flew and were scattered,
and they all fell down on the ground when the goddess had uttered her outcry;
then they turned toward the city, desiring the safety of living.
Terribly shouted aloud then godlike Odysseus, long-suffering,
and with a rush he swooped like an eagle that flies in the high air.
Then indeed the son of Cronos let fly his smoky thunderbolt,
and it fell there in front of the gray-eyed daughter of the mighty sire.
Then to Odysseus spoke again gray-eyed Athena:
“Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus of many devices,
hold now, and cease from the strife of the war that makes equals of all men,
lest in some way Zeus son of Cronos, wide-thundering, be angered.”
So spoke Athena, and he obeyed, and his heart was made glad there.
Then thereafter she set a sworn peace between both of the parties,
Pallas Athena, the child of Zeus who bears the aegis,
like to Mentor in build and in voice altogether.
