The Odyssey — Book X

Aeolus and the bag of winds; the Laestrygonians; a year with Circe.

Next we arrived at Aeolian island, where Aeolus made his
home, Hippotas’ son, who was dear to the deathless immortals.
Floating the island remained; all around it a wall had been fashioned,
bronze and unbreakable, while from the sea rose the cliff without foothold.
Twelve of his children were born and were living with him in the palace,
six were daughters and six were sons in the flower of manhood;
daughters he gave to his sons to possess as their wives in the household.
Always they feast at the side of their dear and beloved father
also their reverend mother, and good things uncounted are near them.
All day long is the house filled with savory fragrance, the courtyard
ringing with sound; but at nighttime they sleep with their reverend women,
lying in blankets together on well-corded bedsteads in chambers.
Into their city we came and the beautiful house of Aeolus.
One month long he attended me well and inquired about all things,
Ilium, Argive vessels, and homeward return of Achaeans;
all of the tale in appropriate order I told and related.
Then, when I asked in my turn for the road and entreated his sending,
nothing did he refuse, but prepared my return to the homeland.
Then he presented a bag made out of the flayed hide of one great
ox nine years old, and inside he confined all the blustering windstorms.
Son of great Cronos had made him the steward who ruled over all winds,
either to halt or arouse any wind as his spirit desired it.
There in the hollow ship he secured it with shining and silver
cord, so not even the smallest of breaths might escape from the bag there.
Then he released for my passage the blowing breath of the West Wind,
carrying all of the vessels and men, but the purpose was never
fated to come to completion; our folly was destined to ruin us.
Nine days long we continued our sailing by daytime and nighttime;
then on the tenth day the fields of our fathers were rising before us,
close, and we saw human people attending the fires they had kindled.
Then sweet sleep came down on me, exhausted by ceaseless exertion;
all that time I had managed the sheet of the ship by myself there,
giving it over to no other comrade, to hasten our homeward arrival.
Then my companions began to converse with each other around me,
saying that silver and gold I was carrying into my homeland,
given as gifts by the great-hearted lord Aeolus, son of Hippotas.
Thus would a man glance aside at his neighbor and speak in this manner:
“See how greatly he always is loved and receives every honor
out of humanity, whatever the city or country he comes to.
See what abundance of beautiful treasure he carries from Troy-land,
all of his plunder, while we who have finished the selfsame long journey
come to our country with nothing at all in our hands from the labor.
Now lord Aeolus gave him these things out of friendship and favor.
Come, let us quickly examine the bag and discover its contents,
learning how much of the gold and the silver is held in the bag there.”
Thus they conversed, and the evil advice of my comrades prevailed there.
Opening up the great bag, they released every wind from its binding;
straightway the storm winds seized them and swept them away over water,
weeping, afar from their fathers’ land; and I, suddenly waking,
pondered there in the depth of my own great and blameless spirit
whether to drop from the ship and be drowned in the salt-colored water,
or to endure it in silence and stay there among those still living.
I stayed and I endured; and covering over my head there,
down in the ship I lay, while the vessels were carried by evil
blast of the storm to Aeolian island, my comrades lamenting.
There we set foot on the dry land and drew up an ample supply of
water, and quickly my men took their meal at the side of the swift ships.
Then, when we tasted our measure of food and the drink we were given,
taking a herald beside me and one of the men as companion,
into the famous house of Aeolus I went, and I found him
feasting beside both his wife and the children who lived in his household.
Into the house we entered and sat by the jambs of the doorway,
there on the threshold; they marveled at heart and inquired of my journey:
“Why have you come here, Odysseus? What evil divinity harmed you?
Surely we sent you with every provision, so you might arrive in
your fatherland and your house or whatever location is dearest unto you.”
Thus did they speak, and I answered them while in my heart I was grieving:
“Evil companions have ruined me, they and a pitiless slumber.
Friends, bring a cure, since the power to do so is held in your own hands.”
Thus did I speak and entreat them with words that were gentle and soothing;
they became silent, and then the old father addressed me in answer:
“Out of the island at once, most despicable creature now living!
It is against what is right that I welcome or send on his journey
anyone hated this way by the gods who are blessed and immortal.
Out, since you come to this island abhorred by the gods everlasting.”
Thus having spoken, he sent me away while I heavily groaned there.
There we continued our sailing away with the heart full of sorrow,
while the strength of the men was destroyed by the wearisome rowing,
all our own fault, since no following wind would appear for our voyage.
Six days long we continued our sailing by daytime and nighttime;
then on the seventh day we came to the steep-built citadel Lamus,
Telepylus in the land of Laestrygonians, where one herdsman
driving the livestock in hails the herdsman who drives outward.
There an unsleeping man could have earned for himself double wages,
one wage tending the cattle and one for the silver-white sheep-flocks,
since very close are the paths that are followed by nighttime and daylight.
There we came into the glorious harbor, encircled by one cliff,
sheer and unbroken, extending around it on opposite margins;
two jutting headlands are standing across from each other and reach out
there at the mouth, and a narrow passage provides the sole entrance.
All of the others directed their curving vessels inside it,
mooring within the hollow harbor the ships in a close line;
never a wave was uplifted within it, whether enormous
or very small, but a shining calm spread outward around them.
Only myself held the black ship out of the mouth of the harbor,
there at its edge, and I fastened the cables secure to the cliff rock.
Up to a broken height I ascended and there took my station;
nowhere the labors of oxen or mortals appeared to our eyesight;
only we saw smoke rising aloft from the land in the distance.
Then I sent several companions ahead of the others to find out
what kind of men in the country were eating their bread on the earth there.
Two men I chose for the journey and added a third as their herald.
Out on the land they went and followed a level road, where the wagons
carried the wood to the town from the towering crests of the mountains.
There before reaching the city they met a young woman who drew down
water, the strong daughter born to Laestrygonian Antiphates.
She had descended to Artacia’s beautifully flowing
spring, out of which all the people were carrying water to town there.
Coming beside her, they spoke to the girl and inquired of the ruler,
who was the king of the people and who were the people he governed.
Straightway she pointed the high-roofed house of her father before them.
Then, when they entered the glorious house, they discovered the king’s wife,
huge as the peak of a mountain, and felt an abhorrence in seeing.
Straightway she called from the meeting place the renowned Antiphates,
husband who married her, and he devised their pitiful ruin.
Seizing one man from among my companions, he made him his dinner;
other two men leaped away and flew to the ships in their terror.
Then through the town he raised up the cry of the war; when they heard it,
mighty Laestrygonian men came in throngs from all directions,
thousands, and not like humanity, rather resembling the Giants.
Down from the cliffs they were casting great stones with the weight of a strong man;
straightway there rose from the ships an evil and terrible clamor,
screaming of dying men and the crushing of vessels to pieces.
Spearing the men there like fish, they carried their hideous dinner.
While they destroyed all the people inside of the deep-sided harbor,
then I drew out the sharp-edged sword that I carried beside my
thigh, cutting all of the cables that held the dark-blue-prowed vessel.
Rapidly then I aroused my companions and gave them commandment,
telling them all to bend into oars and escape from the evil;
all of them tore up the sea at once in their terror of dying.
Gladly my own ship fled to the open sea-water and safety,
leaving the beetling cliffs; all the other vessels were ruined.
There we continued our sailing away with the heart full of sorrow,
glad to be free from death though our well-loved comrades had perished.
Then we came to Aeaea’s island, where beautiful-haired and
terrible Circe resided, a goddess with voice like a mortal,
sister by blood of Aeetes, the god with a dangerous spirit;
both had been born to the light-giving Helios, joined with their mother
Perse, herself a daughter whom Ocean brought into being.
There we brought in the vessel without any sound to the shoreline,
into a ship-holding harbor, and some god directed our passage.
There we departed the ship, and for two days long and two nights there
down we lay, consuming our hearts with exhaustion and sorrow.
Yet when the beautiful-haired Dawn brought the third day upon us,
then I took hold of the spear and the sharp-edged sword that I carried,
climbing away from the ship to a place for observing the country,
hoping to see works made by humanity, hoping for voices.
Up to a broken height I ascended and there took my station;
smoke I perceived as it rose from the earth with its widely traveled
roads, in the halls of the goddess through thick-growing brush and the timber.
Then in the depth of my mind and my heart I considered the question,
whether to go and examine the place where the fire-bright smoke rose.
Yet as I pondered, this seemed in my thinking the better decision:
first to return to the ship on the shore of the salt-colored water,
give my companions a meal and then send men to learn of the country.
Yet when I traveled the road and came near to the curve-sided vessel,
then some divinity pitied my loneliness there and provided
one tall-antlered and mighty stag in the road where I traveled.
Out of the forested pasture the stag was descending to river,
there for his drink, since the strength of the sun beat down on his body.
Then as he stepped from the woodland, I struck in the middle of back there;
clean through the stag did my bronze spear run and emerge on the far side.
Down in the dust with a cry he dropped, and his spirit departed.
Setting my foot on his body, I pulled out the bronze-headed spearpoint,
out of the wound, and I laid it aside on the ground where I stood there.
Then I pulled upward the brushwood and gathered the flexible willow,
plaiting a rope that was one fathom long and was thoroughly twisted,
binding together the feet of the beast with the mighty proportions.
Down to the black-hulled ship I returned with the stag on my shoulders,
leaning my weight on the spear, since never upon a single shoulder,
using one hand, could I carry the creature; the beast was enormous.
Down by the ship I cast it and roused all the men from their sorrow,
using the gentle words as beside every man I was standing:
“Friends, though we grieve, we shall not yet descend to the house of great Hades,
not till the day that is destined. Come then, while food and provisions
still are retained in the swift ship, let us attend to our eating,
lest being empty of food we are worn and destroyed by our hunger.”
Thus did I speak, and they rapidly gave their attention and answered;
taking the cloaks from their heads by the shore of the barren salt sea there,
all of them marveled to see the great stag, for the beast was enormous.
Then, when they took in their hearts full delight in the sight of the stag there,
washing their hands, they prepared and made ready the glorious banquet.
So then all day long till the sun and the light were descending,
there we sat feasting on meat past counting and sweet wine beside it.
Then the sun entered the west and the darkness descended around us;
there we lay down to sleep on the surf-line there at the seashore.
When early Dawn had appeared with her beautiful rose-colored fingers,
then I called all my men in assembly and spoke to them openly:
“Hear now my words, my companions, although you are greatly afflicted.
Friends, we know not where darkness is found or the Dawn where she rises,
neither where Sun who gives light to humanity enters beneath the
earth nor where he arises. Come, let us consider, and quickly,
whether a plan is remaining for us; I do not believe it.
Up to a broken height I ascended and saw from its outlook
one island lying encircled by boundless expanses of ocean;
low is the island itself, and the smoke in the midst of the island
rose to my eyes from the brush that was thick and the timber around it.”
Thus did I speak, and the hearts in the depth of their bodies were broken,
holding in mind deeds done by Laestrygonian Antiphates,
also the violent deed of the man-eating mighty Cyclops.
Loudly they wept, and the great tears flowed from their eyes in abundance,
yet no advantage or use was accomplished by all their lamenting.
Then I divided the whole of my strong-greaved men who attended
into two groups, and provided a leader to each of the parties.
I led one band, and the other was led by the godlike Eurylochus.
Quickly we shook all the lots in a helmet constructed of bronze-work;
out leaped the lot that belonged to the great-hearted lord Eurylochus.
Thus he departed, and two-and-twenty men with him traveled,
weeping, and leaving us weeping as well when they went on their journey.
There in a forested glen they discovered the palace of Circe,
built out of polished stones in a place that commanded the landscape.
Mountain-bred wolves were all around it and lions beside them,
beasts that the goddess herself had bewitched when she gave them her evil drugs there.
Yet they attacked not the men or arose in a violent onslaught;
standing, they fawned all around them and waved their long tails in excitement.
Just as the dogs fawn around their master returning from banquet,
since he is always accustomed to carry some sweet-tasting morsels,
so did the strongly clawed wolves and the lions fawn all around them;
they at the sight of the huge and terrible creatures were frightened.
There in the gateway they stood of the beautiful-haired shining goddess;
inside they heard Circe singing aloud with a beautiful voice there,
moving around at a great loom, deathless and never decaying,
weaving the fine-spun, beautiful, graceful, and shining work of a goddess.
Then Polites started to speak to the men who were standing around him,
leader of people and closest to me and the dearest companion:
“Friends, there is someone inside by the mighty loom who is moving,
beautifully singing, and all of the floor of the palace is humming,
whether a goddess or mortal; come, let us call to her loudly.”
Thus did he speak, and they lifted their voices and called to the woman.
Straightway she came from the palace and opened the beautiful doorway,
calling them inward; in innocence all of the men went behind her.
Only Eurylochus stayed at the back, for he feared a deception.
Into the palace she led them and seated them there upon benches;
cheese and barley meal and the pale-colored honey she stirred them,
mixed into Pramnian wine, while she blended within it a measure of
ruinous drugs, so the men should forget the beloved land of their fathers.
Then, when she gave it and they drank down what she offered completely,
striking them there with her wand, she confined them within the pigsties.
Heads of the pigs they possessed and the voice and the bristles and body;
minds were unaltered within them and stayed as they had been beforehand.
Thus they were penned while they wept; and Circe provided them acorns,
fruit of the oak and the ilex and cornel berries for feeding,
such as are eaten by pigs that continually wallow on earth there.
Then Eurylochus came running again to the swift black vessel,
bringing the news of our comrades and all of their bitter destruction.
Yet not a word could he bring himself forth, though he strained to be speaking,
stricken at heart by the anguish; his eyes were filled up with teardrops,
while in his spirit was nothing but sorrow and grieving lament there.
Yet when we all in amazement inquired about what had befallen,
then he related the ruin of all our companions who traveled:
“We went off through the brush as commanded by glorious lord Odysseus;
there in a forested glen we discovered a beautiful palace,
built out of polished stones in a place that commanded the landscape.
There by the side of a great loom someone was singing with clear voice,
whether a goddess or mortal; they lifted their voices and called her.
Straightway she came from the palace and opened the beautiful doorway,
calling them inward; in innocence all of the men went behind her.
Yet I remained at the back, since I feared there might be a deception.
All of the men disappeared there together, and none of them ever
came to my eyesight again, though long I was sitting and watching.”
Thus did he speak; and around my shoulders I slung the great silver-
studded bronze sword and the bow, and commanded the man to return and
lead me again on the selfsame road by which he had come there.
Yet he embraced both my knees, taking hold with his two hands together;
wailing, he spoke to me then, and the words that he uttered took wing there:
“Zeus-born, do not now take me back there against my intention; leave me.
I know you shall not come back by yourself or return with another
one of the men you attend. With those who remain let us hurry,
fleeing, since even now we may still get away from the death-day.”
Thus did he speak, and I spoke to the man and provided an answer:
“Lord Eurylochus, stay in this place and remain where you are now,
eating and drinking beside the hollow and black-hulled vessel.
Yet I shall go, for a mighty necessity lies on my body.”
Thus having spoken, I went from the vessel and shore of the sea-way.
Just as I traveled the sacred glens and was nearly arriving
there at the mighty palace of Circe, the goddess of many drugs there,
Hermes who carries the golden wand on my journey approached me,
taking the form of a man in his youth as I came to the palace,
first-growing down on his lip in the loveliest season of young life.
Taking my hand in his own, he spoke and addressed me directly:
“Where, sorrowful doomed man, do you walk through the hills all alone here,
ignorant of the country? Your men in the palace of Circe
now are confined like pigs in the thick-covered sties where she holds them.
Do you go there to release them? Yourself shall never return from
out of the palace, I tell you, but stay where the others are staying.
Come, I shall free you from evil myself and shall bring you to safety.
Here is a powerful drug you must carry inside Circe’s palace;
this shall avert from your head the arrival of pitiless death-day.
I shall relate all Circe’s designs that shall bring you destruction.
She shall prepare you a potion and cast in the dish many drugs there;
even so, she cannot enchant you at all, for the powerful
medicine I shall provide shall prevent her. I shall explain everything.
Just when the goddess Circe attacks with her long wand against you,
draw from beside your thigh the sharp-edged sword that you carry,
leap upon Circe as though you are truly intending to kill her.
She shall be seized with terror and ask you to enter her bed there.
Do not refuse to lie in the bed of the goddess when asked there,
if you desire she release your companions and welcome you kindly;
yet you must order the goddess to swear by the gods’ mighty oath there
she is not planning to bring any further affliction upon you,
lest when you stand there naked she make you a coward and unman you.”
Thus having spoken, the slayer of Argus presented the medicine,
pulling it out of the earth, and he showed me the form it presented:
black at the root, but its flower appeared to my eyes to be milk-white.
Moly immortals call it, and hard is the labor for mortals
digging it up, but the gods have the power to do every action.
Then lord Hermes departed across the tree-covered island,
going to high Olympus; but I went onward to Circe’s
palace, and many dark thoughts moved through the heart in my body.
There at the doors of the beautiful-haired shining goddess I halted,
standing and calling aloud, and the goddess attended my outcry.
Straightway she came from the palace and opened the beautiful doorway,
calling me inward; I went at her side with the heart full of sorrow.
Into the palace she led me and seated me there on a silver-
studded chair beautifully and elaborately fashioned, with footstool.
Then in a golden cup she prepared me a potion for drinking,
slipping a drug in the mixture, with evil intent in her spirit.
Then, when she gave it, I drank, and the potion in no way bewitched me;
striking me there with her wand, she spoke and addressed me directly:
“Go to the pigsty now and lie down beside your companions.”
Thus did she speak; from beside my thigh I drew out the sharp sword,
leaping at Circe as though I were truly intending to kill her.
Shrieking, she ran underneath the great blade and embraced both my knees there;
wailing, she spoke to me then, and the words that she uttered took wing there:
“Who are you, whence have you come, and where are your city and parents?
Wonder possesses me now that the drugs you have drunk have not changed you;
never another man has endured these drugs without changing,
once he had drunk and they passed the defensive enclosure of tooth-row.
Surely the mind in your breast must possess an enchantment-proof nature.
You must be lord Odysseus, the man who has manifold turnings,
whom the gold-wanded slayer of Argus repeatedly told me
would come here on his homeward return out of Troy in the swift ship.
Come now, place in its sheath the sword that you carry, and let us
two climb into my bed, so we, being mingled together
there in the labor of love, may learn to have trust in each other.”
Thus did she speak, and I spoke to the goddess and gave her an answer:
“Circe, how can you now command me to act with a kindness,
you who have made my companions into pigs in your palace,
keeping me now in this place and designing deceit when you call me
into your chamber and ask me to climb in the bed where you slumber,
so when I stand there naked you make me a coward and unman me?
Never shall I be willing to climb in the bed where you slumber,
not till you bring yourself, goddess, to swear by the gods’ mighty oath there
you are not planning to bring any further affliction upon me.”
Thus did I speak, and she straightway swore as I asked and commanded.
Then, when she finished the oath and had sworn every word to completion,
I climbed into the beautiful bed of the goddess Circe.
Meanwhile, four serving women were working around in the palace,
women whose labor attended the house of the goddess in order.
They are the daughters of springs and the forests and beautiful rivers,
sacred, that flow in their course till they enter the salt-colored sea-way.
One on the chairs threw beautiful covers of purple above them,
first having spread smooth linen beneath all the beautiful fabric;
one drew the silver tables in front of the chairs for the feasting,
setting the baskets fashioned of gold on the tables in order;
one mixed up in a silver bowl honey-hearted and sweet wine,
then she distributed drinking cups that were fashioned of gold-work;
fourth brought water and kindled a powerful fire underneath the
mighty enormous cauldron, and water was heated within it.
Then, when the water had boiled in the brightly shining bronze cauldron,
into the bathtub she set me and bathed from the mighty container,
tempering water to suit my desire as she poured it from head down to shoulders,
till she removed from my limbs all the weariness wasting my spirit.
Then, when she bathed me and richly anointed my body with olive oil,
casting around me a beautiful cloak and a tunic for clothing,
into the palace she led me and seated me there on a silver-
studded chair beautifully and elaborately fashioned, with footstool.
Then an attendant brought water for washing my hands in a pitcher,
beautiful, fashioned of gold, and she poured it above a great silver
basin for washing; beside me she drew up a table with polish.
Then the respected housekeeper carried the bread and set it
there before me with manifold dishes, and gave of her stores freely,
urging my eating; my heart did not wish to partake of the banquet.
There I was sitting with thoughts turned elsewhere and evil foreboding.
Then, when Circe observed me sitting and not putting forward
hands to the bread, and possessed by a terrible grief in my spirit,
close she approached and addressed me, and these words took wing as she uttered:
“Why do you sit there, Odysseus, a man who is stricken with silence,
eating the heart in your body and touching no food and no drinking?
Do you suspect yet another deception? You have no reason
now to be frightened, since I have already sworn the strong oath to you.”
Thus did she speak, and I spoke to the goddess and gave her an answer:
“Circe, what man who possesses a sense of appropriate conduct
ever could bring himself willingly food or a drink to be tasting,
not till he freed his companions and saw with his eyes they were living?
If in good faith you are urging that I now be drinking and eating,
free all the men, so my eyes may behold my companions, the faithful.”
Thus did I speak; and the goddess went out through the hall with her wand there,
opening up all the doors of the pigsty and driving them outward,
still in the form of the pigs that are nine years old and well fattened.
There they were standing in front of the goddess, and moving among them,
Circe anointed each man with a different magical drug there.
Then all the bristles the ruinous drug had made grow on their bodies,
that which the queenly Circe had given them, fell from their members.
Men they became once again, and younger than ever beforehand,
greatly more beautiful also and taller to look at in stature.
All recognized me, and each took hold of my hands in his own hands;
passionate weeping possessed every man, and the house all around us
rang with a terrible sound; even Circe was moved into pity.
Close she approached and addressed me, the radiant one among goddesses:
“Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus endlessly resourceful,
go to the swift-running ship and the shore of the sea without lingering.
First you must haul the vessel ashore on the dry land above it,
stowing your cargo and all of the ship’s equipment in caverns;
then come yourself once again, and bring your companions, the faithful.”
Thus did she speak, and the proud heart within me consented and yielded.
Down to the swift-running ship and the shore of the sea I proceeded;
there by the swift-running ship I discovered my faithful companions,
pitifully lamenting and letting the great tears fall from them.
Just as the calves of the farmyard will gather around all the cattle
coming back filled from their grazing into the yard of the dunghill,
frisking together to meet them—the fences no longer restrain them,
but with incessant lowing they run round the sides of their mothers—
so, when the men with their eyes had perceived me, around me they crowded,
weeping; and deep in their hearts it appeared they had come to their homeland,
come to the city itself and the soil of the country that bore them,
ruggedly coasted Ithaca, where they were nourished and nurtured.
Wailing aloud, they addressed me, and these words took wing as they uttered:
“Zeus-reared man, your return brings joy to us all in our sorrow,
even as though we had come to our homeland, the country of fathers.
Come now, tell of the death and destruction that took our companions.”
Thus did they speak, and I answered them all with compassionate language:
“First we must haul the vessel ashore on the dry land above it,
stowing our cargo and all of the ship’s equipment in caverns;
then bestir yourselves, every man, and come with me swiftly,
so you may look on your friends in the sacred palace of Circe,
eating and drinking their fill, for their stores are forever abundant.”
Thus did I speak, and the men gave heed to the word I had spoken.
Only Eurylochus tried to restrain all the other companions;
raising his voice, he addressed them, and these words took wing as he uttered:
“Pitiful men, where are we going? Why hunger for evils,
entering Circe’s palace, where she will transform us completely,
making us pigs, or perhaps into wolves, or perhaps into lions,
forced to be guards of her mighty house and remain there forever,
just as the Cyclops treated our friends when they entered his courtyard,
led by the reckless Odysseus, who went there among them,
since by this man’s blind folly those comrades also were slaughtered.”
Thus did he speak; and I pondered the matter within me, considering
whether to draw from beside my powerful thigh the long sword blade,
sever his head with a stroke, and bring it to earth in the dust there,
though he was closely related to me by the ties of a marriage.
This man and that one restrained me with honey-sweet words of persuasion:
“Zeus-born man, if you order, we gladly will leave him behind us,
here by the ship to remain and to keep the black vessel protected;
you lead the rest of us onward to Circe’s sacred enclosure.”
Thus they spoke, and they climbed from the side of the ship and the seashore;
nor did Eurylochus stay by the hollow vessel behind them:
after us came he as well, for he feared my terrible censure.

Meanwhile Circe had bathed all the other companions within her
palace with tender attention, and rubbed them richly with olive
oil, and dressed them in fleecy cloaks and in tunics beneath them.
All of the men we discovered at generous feasting within there.
When they beheld one another and knew every face that confronted
theirs, they lamented and wept, and the whole house echoed around them.
Close she approached and addressed me, the radiant one among goddesses:
“Let no more of this swelling lamentation trouble the household.
I myself know well what you suffered upon the fish-teeming
sea, and the wrongs that malicious men have inflicted on dry land.
Come now, eat of your food and partake of the wine that is waiting,
till you recover again in your breasts that spirited courage
held when you first left behind you the soil of the country of fathers,
ruggedly coasted Ithaca. Now you are withered and spiritless,
always recalling the pain of the difficult wandering; never
does your heart turn to feasting, for truly your suffering was heavy.”
Thus did she speak, and our proud hearts consented and yielded within us.
There, as the days made their courses, the whole full circle of one year,
feasting we sat upon meat beyond counting and sweet wine beside it.
But when the year had passed, and the seasons had turned in their orbit,
months began waning away, and the long days came to completion;
then my companions, the faithful, called me aside and addressed me:
“Strange one, remember at last the land of your fathers; the season
now has arrived, if indeed it is fated that you shall be rescued,
coming again to your high-roofed house and the land of your fathers.”
Thus did they speak, and the proud heart within me consented and yielded.
So through the whole of the day till the light of the sun had descended,
feasting we sat upon meat beyond counting and sweet wine beside it.
But when the sun went down and the sacred darkness had gathered,
all of the men lay down in the shadowy halls of the palace.
I, going up to the bed of surpassing beauty of Circe,
clasped both her knees in my hands as a suppliant; the goddess attended.
Raising my voice, I addressed her, and these words took wing as I uttered:
“Circe, fulfill now the promise you gave me and send me to homeland;
already my spirit is eager to go, and the hearts of the others;
all of them wear out my heart as they gather around me in mourning,
whenever you are away and not in the hall to restrain them.”
Thus did I speak, and at once the radiant goddess responded:
“Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus endlessly resourceful,
you shall no longer remain in my house when your wishes oppose it.
Yet there is first one other journey that you must accomplish:
into the house of Hades and dread Persephone you must
go, to inquire of the spirit of Theban Tiresias, prophet
blind in his eyes, but whose understanding remains unimpaired still.
Even in death Persephone granted him thoughtful perception,
him alone; all the others are shadows that flutter about him.”
Thus did she speak, and the dear heart within me was broken completely.
There on the bed I sat and wept; and the spirit within me
wished no longer to live and to look on the brightness of sunlight.
But when I had grown weary of weeping and writhing in anguish,
then I addressed her in answer and spoke these words to the goddess:
“Circe, who will be guide on the course of this difficult journey?
No man yet in a black ship ever has sailed into Hades.”
Thus did I speak, and at once the radiant goddess responded:
“Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus endlessly resourceful,
let no concern for a pilot aboard your vessel distress you.
Set up the mast and extend on its yards the glistening white sails,
then take your seat; for the breath of the North Wind will carry her onward.
But when your ship has completed the passage across the Ocean,
there is a low shore standing, and Persephone’s sacred woodlands,
tall-growing poplars of darkness and willows that scatter their fruit young.
Beach your ship at the edge of the Ocean’s deep-running waters;
you must advance by yourself to the dank domain of the death-god.
There into Acheron flow Pyriphlegethon’s fire-bearing waters,
also Cocytus, a stream that is branched from the water of Styx there;
there is a rock at the place where the thundering rivers are meeting.
Hero, draw close to the rock, and precisely obey my directions:
dig out a trench that extends for a cubit in each of its measures;
pour a libation around it for all of the people departed,
honey and milk being first, then sweet wine poured as the second,
water the third; and on these you must sprinkle the white flour of barley.
Earnestly pray to the strengthless heads of the dead and entreat them,
vowing that, after your coming to Ithaca, there in your palace
you will give them your best barren cow and heap treasures for burning;
then for Tiresias alone you will slaughter a black-fleeced
ram that excels all the others in strength and in worth in your sheepfold.
When you have prayed to the glorious nation of dead men and women,
slaughter a black ewe there with a ram, and bend both of their faces
downward to Erebus; turn yourself toward the streams of the river.
Then in their multitudes there will gather around you the spirits,
souls of the people who died and have passed from the world of the living.
Order your men and encourage them then to be skinning the carcasses,
sheep that lie slaughtered there by the pitiless bronze of the weapon;
let them be burned and prayers be offered before the immortals,
powerful Hades and dread Persephone, queen of the darkness.
Draw for yourself the sharp-edged sword from beside your strong thigh there;
sit, and allow no strengthless head of the people departed
near to the blood until you have questioned Tiresias fully.
Swiftly the seer will come to your side, O leader of peoples;
he will reveal to you then the road and the measure of journey,
also the means of your homecoming over the fish-teeming sea-depths.”
Thus did she speak; and at once came Dawn on her gold-glimmering throne-seat.
Then she arrayed me in garments, a cloak with a tunic beneath it;
she, the divine nymph, covered herself with a great shining silver
mantle, both finely and gracefully woven, and girded her waist with
beautiful gold, and above on her head she adjusted a long veil.
I made my way through the hall and aroused my companions from slumber,
standing beside every man and exhorting him gently in order:
“No more lying asleep in the sweetness of drowsing and slumber.
Let us depart; for the queenly Circe has shown me the pathway.”
Thus did I speak, and their proud hearts consented and yielded within them.
Yet not even from there did I lead every comrade uninjured.
One, Elpenor, the youngest among us, was sleeping above them,
neither a powerful warrior nor greatly sound in his judgment;
he had lain down far apart from his friends in the sacred enclosure,
heavy with wine and desiring the coolness, atop Circe’s palace.
Hearing the noise and commotion of all his companions departing,
suddenly up he leapt, and he did not remember, befuddled,
he must return by descending the long-built ladder below him;
headlong he fell from the roof, and the bones of his neck were completely
snapped from the spine, and his spirit descended to Hades’ dominion.
As the companions were starting to go, I addressed them in order:
“You are perhaps supposing that now you are going to your own
cherished country; but Circe has marked us a different pathway:
into the house of Hades and dread Persephone we must
go, to inquire of the spirit of Theban Tiresias, prophet.”
Thus did I speak, and their own hearts broke in their bodies completely.
Right where they stood, they sat on the earth, pulled hair from their temples,
weeping; but nothing of profit was born of their lamentation.

While we were going our way to the swift black ship and the seashore,
grieving deeply in heart and letting the great tears fall from us,
Circe meanwhile had gone in advance and beside the black vessel
tethered a dark ewe there with a ram for the rites of the dead men,
slipping with ease from our notice. For who with his eyes can behold one
god in despite of that god as the deathless one passes among us?
