The Odyssey — Book 3

Pylos: Nestor's tales of the returns; Telemachus rides for Sparta.

Now from the beautiful water rose Helios, suddenly leaping
up to the brazen expanse of the sky, there to shine for immortals
and for the mortals who live on the grain-giving breadth of the plowland.
Into the strong-built city of Neleus, Pylos, they entered.
There by the shore of the sea, all the people were making an offering,
black-colored bulls, to the dark-haired shaker and lord of the earthways.
Nine were the companies seated, five hundred men in every company;
nine were the bulls that were standing in front of each gathered division.
Just as they tasted the innards and burned the thighbones for godhead,
when they came straight into the harbor; they brailed the symmetrical vessel's
sails and furled them above, moored the ship, and themselves disembarked there.
Young Telemachus left the ship, with Athena proceeding before him.
First the gray-eyed goddess Athena addressed him and gave him instruction:

“Young Telemachus, now you have no further need to be bashful,
not in the least; for precisely because of this purpose you sailed here,
seeking your father, to learn where the earth has concealed him and what doom
met him. Go straight to the horse-breaking Nestor and stand there before him.
Let us discover the counsel concealed in the depths of his bosom.
Ask him yourself, so that he may reveal the infallible true word.
No lie shall come from his mouth, for his mind is exceedingly prudent.”

Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:

“Mentor, how shall I go to the man, and with what words shall I greet him?
Still I am little experienced in the elaborate art of discussion,
and a young man is embarrassed to question a man who is older.”

Then the gray-eyed goddess Athena addressed him a second time, saying:

“Young Telemachus, some words your own understanding shall show you,
others a god shall suggest; for I do not imagine you entered
life or were nurtured apart from the gods’ everlasting affection.”

Thus having spoken, Athena proceeded ahead of him swiftly;
close in the steps of the goddess he followed her onward and swiftly.
Into the place of assembly they came, to the rows of the Pylians.
Nestor was seated there with his sons, and around them companions
readied the feast, some roasting the meat, while the others were skewering.
Then, when the gathering noticed the strangers, they came in a body,
clasping their hands in a welcome and asking the two to be seated.
First Peisistratus, Nestor's son, as he came up before them,
took them both by the hand and invited them into the banquet,
seating them there on the soft woolen fleeces that covered the seashore,
close by his brother Thrasymedes and Nestor his father.
Portions of innards he gave them and poured out the wine for their drinking
into a cup made of gold, and he pledged her and spoke in salutation
there to Athena, the daughter of Zeus who possesses the aegis:

“Stranger, begin now by praying to lordly Poseidon the sea-god,
since his is the banquet upon which you came when you entered.
Then, when you pour him libation and pray in the customary manner,
give to this other man also the cup of the honey-sweet vintage,
so he may pour, for I think he too makes prayer to immortals.
All human beings have need of the gods who are living forever.
Yet he is younger, the same age as I in the order of seasons;
therefore to you do I first give the beautiful cup made of gold here.”

Thus he spoke and set in her hand the cup of the honey-sweet vintage.
Joy filled Athena because of the thoughtful and equitable young man,
since in her hand before anyone else's he placed the gold vessel.
Straightway she prayed at considerable length to the lordly Poseidon:

“Hear me, Poseidon, the god who encircles and holds the earth firmly;
do not begrudge the fulfillment of these our prayers and intentions.
First upon Nestor and all of his sons now bestow recognition;
afterward grant to the rest of the Pylians gracious repayment,
paying them all in return for this glorious hundredfold offering.
Grant that I and Telemachus sail to our home with the purpose
fully accomplished for which in our swift black ship we have come here.”

Thus did she pray, and herself was fulfilling the prayer she had offered.
Then in the hands of Telemachus placed she the beautiful wine cup;
just as the goddess had prayed, the dear son of Odysseus prayed then.
After the outermost meat had been roasted and taken from firelight,
they shared portions and feasted together upon the magnificent banquet.
Then, when desire for food and for drinking was put from their bodies,
Gerenian Nestor the horseman began to address the assembly:

“Now is a better occasion to question and ask of the strangers
who they may be, since already the feast has delighted their spirits.
Strangers, who are you? From where have you sailed on the waterway pathways?
Come you for business, or wander without an appointed direction,
even as pirates who rove on the face of the waters and hazard
all their own lives while bringing affliction to people of strange lands?”

Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus,
now full of courage; Athena herself put the strength in his spirit,
so he could ask for a word of his father, so long in his absence,
also that noble renown among mortals might come to himself there:

“Nestor, the son of great Neleus, glory renowned of Achaeans,
you ask from where we have come, and I freely shall give you the answer.
We are from Ithaca under the tree-covered mountain of Neion;
private, and not of the people, is this our affair I am speaking.
I am pursuing the far-ranging fame of my father, to hear some
word of the steadfast and godlike Odysseus, whom people have told me
fought there beside you and brought down ruin on Troyland’s fortress.
All of the other Achaeans, as many as fought with the Trojans,
we have discovered by word, and the bitter death each encountered.
Only his death has the son of great Cronos made past all discovering.
Nobody has the assurance to say where the man may have perished,
whether on land he went down underneath the attack of his foemen,
or in the deep under waves of the sea-goddess Amphitrite.
Therefore I come to your knees in the hope you consent to inform me,
telling the bitter death that he met, whether you were an eyewitness,
or from the speech of another unfortunate wanderer heard it.
More than all others his mother gave birth to the man for affliction.
Do not diminish the story from pity or courtesy toward me;
tell me in full every sight that your own eyes encountered before you.
Hear my entreaty: if ever my excellent father Odysseus
promised a word or an action to you and fulfilled what he promised
there in the country of Troy, where Achaeans endured their afflictions,
call it to mind for me now, and reveal the infallible true word.”

Then Gerenian Nestor the horseman replied to him, saying:

“Dear child, since you remind me of grief and the hardships we suffered
there in that country, we ungovernable sons of Achaeans—
all we endured as we roved in the ships on the mist-covered sea-way,
looking for plunder wherever Achilles conducted our war band,
all we endured while we fought at the great city ruled by King Priam—
there through the years the best of our people were slaughtered in battle.
There lies Ajax, beloved of Ares, and there lies Achilles;
there Patroclus, whose counsel was equal to counsel of godhead;
there my own well-beloved son, altogether courageous and blameless,
swift-footed Antilochus, excellent runner and excellent spearman.
Many the other afflictions we suffered besides them; but what man,
born among mortals, could tell and enumerate all of the story?
No, not if you remained for five full years or for six years,
asking me all of the evils the excellent Argives encountered;
sooner, exhausted, you then would return to the land of your fathers.
Nine years long we were stitching destruction around them and plotting
every conceivable cunning, and Cronos' son scarcely ended it.
No man there would openly set his intelligence against that man's counsel,
no man who wished to succeed, for greatly surpassed them Odysseus
in every form of deception—your father, if you are truly
born from his blood. I am seized with astonishment, looking upon you.
Certainly all of your speeches resemble the speeches he offered;
no one would think that a younger man could resemble him speaking.
All of the time we remained there, the noble Odysseus and I would
never be found in assembly or council opposing each other.
One heart between us, with wisdom of mind and considerate judgment,
guided the Argives in counsel, devising the best way before them.
Then, when at last we had ravaged the steep-walled city of Priam,
entered the ships, and a god had dispersed the Achaeans asunder,
Zeus in the depth of his heart designed a calamitous homeward
road for the Argives, for not every man had intelligence in him,
nor was he just. Many therefore encountered a destiny evil,
all through the ruinous wrath of the mighty god's gray-eyed daughter.
She set a quarrel between the two sons who were born of great Atreus.
Both of them called the Achaeans at once to a general meeting,
rashly and out of due order, when Helios sank in the westward,
while all the sons of Achaea arrived there made heavy by wine-drink.
Both of the kings then explained why the host had been called to assembly.
There Menelaus encouraged the whole of the gathered Achaeans
all to remember the journey for home on the broad back of ocean.
Agamemnon was not at all pleased by the words of his brother;
he wished to hold the host and to make the appropriate offerings,
holy hecatombs, hoping to soften Athena's harsh anger—
fool that he was, for he knew not the goddess would not be persuaded.
Minds of the gods everlasting are not turned around in a moment.
So the two stood and exchanged bitter words with each other before us;
then the Achaeans in strong-plated greaves rose up in a clamor,
making a terrible din, while two separate counsels divided.
All through the night we reposed on our anger and brooded on harshness
aimed at each other, while Zeus was preparing a stroke of destruction.
Then with the dawning, one half of us hauled down the ships to the bright sea,
loading possessions aboard and the women in low-girded garments.
Half of the army remained and was held from the journey, continuing
there with the son born of Atreus, Agamemnon, shepherd of peoples.
Half of us entered the ships and departed; and rapidly ran they,
since underneath them a god smoothed over the monster-filled sea-way.
Coming to Tenedos, victims we offered the gods everlasting,
longing for home; but no thought of returning was yet in Zeus' spirit.
Iron of heart, he awakened a second malignant contention.
Some wheeled around their curving ships and returned on the sea-way,
those with Odysseus, war-seasoned lord of the manifold counsels,
once more offering favor to Agamemnon, the son born of Atreus.
I with the company close-gathered ships that were following after
fled ever onward, because I perceived a divinity scheming.
Tydeus' warlike son also fled and aroused his companions.
Late in our wake came the fair-haired hero, the lord Menelaus,
catching us there upon Lesbos, debating the lengthy sea-crossing:
whether to sail on the seaward side of precipitous Chios,
passing the island of Psyria, keeping Chios leftward,
or on the landward side of Chios, past wind-shaken Mimas.
Then we petitioned the god for a sign, and a sign he provided,
bidding us cut through the midst of the sea to the island Euboea,
thus to escape from the terrible evil with greatest rapidity.
Whistling behind us, a favoring wind rose up, and the vessels
ran very swiftly along fish-thronged passages, reaching Geraestus
during the night. Many thighs of bulls to Poseidon we offered,
laid on the fire, after measuring all of the great sea's distance.
It was the fourth day when Diomedes' comrades and faithful companions
moored all their well-balanced ships in the horse-grazing country of Argos.
I continued to Pylos; the wind never failed from the moment
godhead had first sent it forth to arise and to follow behind me.
Thus I came home, dear child, knowing nothing and bearing no tidings,
which of the Argives had safely returned and which men had been ruined.
All I have heard while I sit in my halls and continue as ruler,
you shall discover, as fitting; I shall not conceal it before you.
Safe home, people report, came the Myrmidons, furious spearmen,
led by the splendid son who was born from the great-hearted hero Achilles.
Safe also came Philoctetes, the glorious offspring of Poias.
All of his comrades Idomeneus safely conducted to Crete-land,
all who escaped from the war; not a man did the sea take away from him.
Even though distant, yourselves have heard of the son born of Atreus,
how he came home and how cruelly Aegisthus devised his destruction.
Grim was the price that the man in the end paid fully for murder.
How good it is when a son of the man who has perished survives him!
That son avenged his own father by killing the treacherous murderer,
crooked in counsel Aegisthus, who slaughtered his glorious father.
You too, friend—for I see you are handsome and tall in your stature—
keep yourself brave, so that people unborn may commend you hereafter.”

Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:

“Nestor, the son of great Neleus, glory renowned of Achaeans,
surely that son brought terrible vengeance, and all the Achaeans
widely shall carry his fame for the knowledge of people hereafter.
Would that the gods might clothe me in similar strength and endow me,
so I could pay back the suitors for all their oppressive transgression,
insolent men who against me devise every reckless aggression!
Yet no such happiness has been spun by the gods for our household,
neither for me nor my father; and now I must bear it regardless.”

Then Gerenian Nestor the horseman replied to him, saying:

“Dear child, since you yourself have recalled this affair in your speaking,
word comes to me that numerous men who are courting your mother
fill up the halls in despite of your will and are plotting their evil.
Tell me, do you submit of your own free will to oppression,
or do the people throughout the land, at a god's prompting, hate you?
Who can be certain the man shall not one day return and requite their
violence, either alone or together with all the Achaeans?
Would that the gray-eyed goddess Athena might choose so to love you,
just as she cared in the days long ago for the glorious hero Odysseus
there in the country of Troy, where Achaeans endured their afflictions.
Never have I seen gods show love to a man so directly,
just as Athena the goddess stood plainly beside that Odysseus.
If she should choose to adore you like that and attend you in spirit,
more than one man would entirely lose every thought of the marriage.”

Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:

“Elder, I think no fulfillment shall ever be made of that language.
Far too great is the thing that you say, and amazement has seized me.
Never could I hope it happens, not even if gods should desire it.”

Then the gray-eyed goddess Athena addressed him a second time, saying:

“Young Telemachus, what kind of word has escaped from your tooth-fence?
Easily godhead, if willing, can bring a man safely from far lands.
I would prefer to endure an abundance of troubles beforehand,
then to return to my home and behold my appointed homecoming,
rather than come to my hearth and be killed, as the king Agamemnon
died through the treacherous schemes of Aegisthus and even his own wife.
Yet from the death that is common to all, not even immortals
can shield a man they love when the destined occasion arrives and
ruinous death, laying mortals low, overtakes him and holds him.”

Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:

“Mentor, no longer let us speak of him, notwithstanding our sorrow.
No true return any longer remains for my father; the deathless
gods long ago have devised his destruction and black-colored death-doom.
Now there is something else that I wish to inquire and discover
here from old Nestor, for he above others knows justice and wisdom.
Three generations of men, people say, he has governed as ruler;
therefore in looking upon him I seem to behold an immortal.
Nestor, the son of great Neleus, tell me the whole of the true thing:
how did the wide-ruling son of great Atreus die, Agamemnon?
Where was the king Menelaus? What death did the treacherous schemer,
crooked in counsel Aegisthus, devise for a man who was better?
Was Menelaus not there in Achaean Argos, but roving
somewhere among other mortals, that this man took heart and then killed him?”

Then Gerenian Nestor the horseman replied to him, saying:

“I shall reveal to you, child, every part of the truth without error.
You have already imagined yourself how the story would happen,
if Menelaus, the fair-haired son born of Atreus, coming
home out of Troyland, had found that Aegisthus alive in the palace.
No man would heap up a mound of the earth on the dead man's remains then;
carrion birds and the dogs would have torn and devoured him together,
lying out there on the plain, far away from the streets of the city.
Not one Achaean woman would mourn him; his deed was a horror.
We were away in the country of Troy, winning many a war-prize,
while in the horse-grazing country of Argos he lingered in comfort,
working on Agamemnon's wife all the time with his flattering language.
First she rejected the shameful affair and resisted the schemer,
radiant Clytemnestra, for sound understanding was still hers.
There at her side was a singer, to whom the great son born of Atreus,
sailing for Troy, gave strictest command to look after his consort.
Yet when the destiny sent by the gods finally bound her to ruin,
then to a desolate island Aegisthus conveyed the poor singer,
leaving him there to become both the spoil and the prey of the winged ones.
Willing, he brought the now-willing woman to live in his household.
Many the thighs that he burned for the gods upon sanctified altars,
many the gifts that he hung, woven fabric and glittering gold-work,
after accomplishing what in his heart he had never expected.
Now on our journey from Troy we had sailed in the company of each other,
I and the son born of Atreus, joined in affectionate friendship.
Yet when we came to the sacred headland of Athens at Sunium,
Phoebus Apollo approached with the gentle shafts of his arrows,
striking and killing the steersman who guided the ship of Menelaus,
still with the steering oar of the fast-running ship in his two hands,
Phrontis, the son of Onetor, who far outperformed human peoples
steering a ship when the violent storm winds descended upon it.
Thus Menelaus was held in that place, though he hastened his journey,
burying there his companion and giving the rites that were proper.
Then, when he too went on over wine-colored seas in the hollow
ships and in rapidity came to precipitous Malea's summit,
Zeus of the wide voice planned for him there an abhorrent road homeward,
pouring the breath of the screaming and turbulent winds on his vessels,
mountainous waves that enormously swelled on the face of the sea-way.
There he divided the fleet, driving part to the island of Crete-land,
where the Cydonians lived by Iardanus' river and waters.
There a sheer cliff with a smooth face descends to the salt sea below it,
there at the edge of the Gortynian land on the mist-covered sea-way,
where the South Wind drives a great wave toward the headland on leftward,
facing toward Phaestus, while one little rock holds the great wave back.
There some ships landed, and barely the men could escape from destruction,
though on the reef all the vessels were smashed by the waves of the sea-way.
Five other ships with their dark-colored prows were together transported,
carried by wind and the water and grounded upon the Egyptian shorelands.
Thus Menelaus, collecting abundant possessions and gold-work,
wandered by ship through the countries of people whose languages differed.
Meanwhile Aegisthus devised those abominable deeds in the homeland.
Seven whole years he reigned over Mycenae abundant in gold-work,
having killed Atreus' son, while the people submitted beneath him.
Then in the eighth year noble Orestes returned as his evil,
home out of Athens, and killed the assassin who slaughtered his father,
crooked in counsel Aegisthus, who murdered his glorious father.
After the killing, Orestes provided the Argives a grave-feast,
one for his hateful mother and one for the coward Aegisthus.
That very day Menelaus, renowned for the war cry, arrived there,
bringing possessions, as many as all of his vessels could carry.
Do not, my friend, be a long time wandering far from your household,
leaving possessions behind and abandoning men in your palace
swollen with violent arrogance, lest they devour all your substance,
sharing your property out and reducing your journey to nothing.
Go to the king Menelaus, I urge and advise you directly:
he has but lately returned from the foreign and faraway peoples,
nations from which no man in the depth of his heart could be hopeful
ever to come back home, once the storm winds had driven him wandering
into a sea so enormous not even the birds in their wing-flight
cross it within a whole year, so vast and so terrible is it.
Go with the ship you possess and the company of your companions,
or, if you rather would travel by land, both a chariot and horses
here you may take, and my sons shall accompany you on the journey
into the shining Lacedaemon, home of the fair-haired Menelaus.
Ask him yourself, so that he may reveal the infallible true word.
No lie shall come from his mouth, for his mind is exceedingly prudent.”

Thus he spoke, while the sun sank down and the twilight descended.
Then the gray-eyed goddess Athena addressed the assembly among them:

“Elder, in all you have said you have spoken with fitting proportion.
Come now, cut out the tongues and prepare the wine in the mixing bowls,
so we may pour to Poseidon and all of the other immortals,
then turn our thought to our sleep, for the hour appointed is on us.
Light has already descended beneath the gloom of the westward;
sitting too long at a feast of the gods is not fitting. Let us go.”

Thus spoke the daughter of Zeus, and the people attended her summons.
Heralds poured water to cleanse all the hands of the people assembled;
young men filled up the wine bowls, crowning the mixture with drinking,
serving to all, first pouring a portion in each cup for godhead.
Into the fire they cast all the tongues; then they stood and made offering.
Then, when they poured and had drunk what the heart of each person desired,
young Telemachus rose with the gray-eyed goddess Athena,
both then intending to go to the hollow-built ship for the nighttime.
Nestor restrained them, however, and caught them with words of insistence:

“Zeus and the rest of the gods who are living forever forbid it,
you should depart from my dwelling and go to your swift-running vessel,
leaving as though from a man altogether without cloak and impoverished,
one who possesses no cloaks or abundance of blankets within his
house, nor has soft bedding for either himself or the guest-friend!
I have an ample abundance of beautiful blankets and cloaks here.
Never while I am alive shall the dear son of this man Odysseus
lie for the night on the deck of a ship; and not afterward either,
while any sons I have fathered remain in the halls of my household,
able to welcome whatever guest-friend may come to my doorway.”

Then the gray-eyed goddess Athena addressed him a second time, saying:

“Well have you spoken, beloved old friend, and it now is appropriate
young Telemachus follows your word, for that course is far better.
Let him accompany you and then sleep in the halls of your household.
I shall return to the black-colored ship and attend to the comrades,
strengthening all of their spirits and giving them each their instructions.
I may claim to be there the only man who is elder;
all of the others are younger companions who follow from friendship,
each of them equal in age to the great-hearted young Telemachus.
There let me lie for the night by the hollow and black-colored vessel.
Then in the morning I go to the great-hearted Cauconian people,
where an old debt is still owed to me, neither small nor recent.
Since this young man has now come to your house, you must send him hereafter,
riding a chariot, joined by a son of your own; and provide him
horses that run with the lightest of feet and are strongest in labor.”

Thus having spoken, the gray-eyed goddess Athena departed,
taking the form of a sea eagle; all who beheld it were startled.
Nestor the old man marveled at what his own eyes had discovered.
Taking Telemachus' hand, he addressed him aloud by his name there:

“Dear friend, no fear is in me you shall ever prove coward or worthless,
if as a man still so young you have gods to attend and escort you.
This was no other of all the immortals who dwell on Olympus,
no, but the daughter of Zeus, most glorious Tritogeneia,
she who among all the Argives gave honor to noble Odysseus.
Queen, be propitious, and grant excellent glory and fame now,
both upon me and my children and also my reverent bedmate.
I in return shall provide you a broad-browed heifer, a yearling,
never subdued, one no man has led underneath the constraining
yoke; I shall offer her, pouring the gold all around on her horn-tips.”

Thus did he pray, and the goddess Athena attended his prayer.
Then Gerenian Nestor the horseman conducted the people,
sons and the husbands of daughters, away to his beautiful household.
Then, when they came to the famous and beautiful house of the ruler,
down in their order they sat on the chairs and the benches surrounding.
Then for their coming the elder prepared in a bowl an abundance
of wine sweet to be drunk, eleven years aged in the storeroom,
opened for them by the stewardess, loosening seals on the vessel.
Some of this wine in the bowl the old man mixed and then to Athena
prayed for a long time, pouring to Zeus' aegis-bearing daughter.
Then, when they poured and had drunk what the heart of each person desired,
all of the others went homeward to sleep, each man to his own house.
There Gerenian Nestor the horseman provided a bedstead
for Telemachus, cherished son of the godlike hero Odysseus,
cord-strung beneath the reverberant porch at the front of the household.
Next to him rested Peisistratus, excellent ash-speared commander,
only unmarried son who remained in the halls of the household.
Nestor himself lay down in the inward room of the high house,
where the respected lady his wife made his bed and his resting.
When Dawn in her earliness rose with her rose-colored fingers,
then from his bed rose up Gerenian Nestor the horseman.
Out of the house he proceeded and sat on the smooth-polished stone seats
standing in front of the lofty and strongly constructed house door,
white-colored stones, all shining as though they were polished with oil there.
There in the days long ago Neleus sat, as a counselor godlike;
now he was gone to the house of great Hades, subdued by his death-doom.
There in his turn sat Gerenian Nestor, the guard of Achaeans,
holding the scepter. His sons came around him and gathered together,
leaving their rooms: Echephron, Stratius standing beside him,
Perseus, Aretus, and godlike Thrasymedes the spearman;
sixth of them came Peisistratus, hero, and joined the assembly.
Bringing the godlike young Telemachus, they seated him with them.
Then Gerenian Nestor the horseman began to address the assembly:

“Quickly, beloved sons, you must now bring my wish to fulfillment,
so I may render Athena propitious before all immortals,
she who appeared to me openly there at the god’s splendid banquet.
Come, let one go to the plain for a heifer as fast as he can go,
letting the herdsman who watches the cattle conduct her behind him;
one must descend to the black-colored ship of the great-hearted young man,
bringing the whole of his company here and abandoning two men;
one tell Laerces the goldsmith to come to the place of our feasting,
so he may pour out the gold all around on the horns of the heifer.
All of the others remain here together, and tell the slave women
there in the house to prepare through the glorious halls for the banquet,
bringing us seats and the firewood around them and radiant water.”

Thus he spoke, and at once every person was busily working.
Up from the plain came the heifer; and out of the swift-running vessel
came the companions who followed the great-hearted young Telemachus.
Then came the smith with the brazen utensils, the means of his craftwork,
anvil and hammer and well-fashioned tongs that he used in the firelight,
all of the tools that he worked with the gold; and Athena approached them,
there to receive her due offering. Nestor, the old man and horseman,
gave him the gold, and the goldsmith hammered and poured it around the
horns of the heifer, so that the goddess might see and be gladdened.
Stratius and noble Echephron led by the horns the young heifer.
Out of the storeroom Aretus came with the cleansing water,
carried in one hand inside of a basin adorned with flower-work,
while in the other he carried the barley; there stood Thrasymedes,
steadfast in battle, with keen-edged ax in his hand for the slaughter.
Perseus held up the blood bowl. Then Nestor, the old man and horseman,
started with water for hands and the barley, and prayed to Athena
long, making first dedication and casting head-hairs in the firelight.
Then, when their prayers had been made and the scattering barley was thrown down,
straightway the son born of Nestor, the high-hearted lord Thrasymedes,
stood by the heifer and struck; and the ax-blade severed the sinews
there in the neck and relaxed all her strength. Then the women cried loudly—
daughters of Nestor together with wives of his sons and his honored
wife Eurydice, the eldest-born daughter of noble Clymenus.
Then from the earth with its wide roads lifting the heifer, they held her;
and Peisistratus, leader of men, cut the throat of the heifer.
Then, when the black blood ran and the life left all of the bones there,
rapidly breaking the body apart, they cut out the thighbones,
all in the customary way, and they wrapped them abundantly in fat,
doubling layers and laying the raw meat upon them in pieces.
Nestor burned these on split pieces of wood, pouring fire-colored wine there;
young men beside him were holding the forks that were five-pointed upward.
Then, when the thighs had been thoroughly burned and the innards were tasted,
slicing the rest into pieces, they fastened the pieces on skewers,
roasted it all while they held the sharp-pointed spits in their own hands.
Meanwhile the beautiful Polycaste had bathed young Telemachus—
she was the youngest-born daughter of Nestor, the offspring of Neleus.
Then, when she bathed him and richly anointed his body with olive oil,
she put a beautiful mantle around him together with tunic.
Out of the bath he emerged in his body resembling immortals,
went and sat down by Nestor, the shepherd and ruler of peoples.
After the outermost meat had been roasted and taken from firelight,
down they sat and partook of the feast, while excellent men came to serve them,
pouring the wine for their drinking in beautiful vessels of gold-work.
Then, when desire for food and for drinking was put from their bodies,
Gerenian Nestor the horseman began to address the assembly:

“Come, my sons, and the beautiful-maned horses yoke for Telemachus,
leading them under the chariot, so he may make his departure.”

Thus he spoke, and the sons gave ear and at once they obeyed him.
Rapidly then they yoked the swift-footed horses under the wagon.
Bread and wine were placed in the car by the woman who managed the household,
also the cooked meats eaten by kings who are cherished by great Zeus.
Young Telemachus mounted the beautifully fashioned two-wheeled chariot;
close by his side came Peisistratus, Nestor's son and commander,
mounted the car and immediately took in his hands all the rein-straps.
Whipping the horses to running, they willingly flew on the roadway,
into the plain, leaving Pylos' precipitous city behind them.
All through the day they shook the yoke that was fitted between them.
Down went the sun at the last, and the roadways were shadowed in darkness.
Then they arrived at Pherae and the house of the lord Diocles,
son of Ortilochus, he whom the stream-god Alpheus fathered.
There they remained for the night, and the lord gave them gifts of the guest-law.
When Dawn in her earliness rose with her rose-colored fingers,
then they yoked up the horses and mounted the decorated wagon,
drove from the gateway and out from beneath the reverberant forecourt.
Whipping the horses to running, they willingly flew on the roadway.
Into the wheat-bearing plain they arrived, and from there they pressed toward
journey’s end, for the swift-footed horses conveyed them securely.
Down went the sun at the last, and the roadways were shadowed in darkness.
