The Odyssey — Book XX

The night before; the omens of the last day; the ox-hoof; Theoclymenus sees the dark.

But in the forecourt there lay down noble Odysseus for sleeping.
Under him first he spread a raw hide stripped from an ox for bedding,
and above it many the fleeces of sheep that Achaeans had slaughtered.
Then Eurynome cast a cloak over him there as he slumbered.
There lay Odysseus awake, in his spirit devising destruction
for the suitors; and out from the hall came forth all the women,
those who before had consorted and lain with the suitors continually,
giving each other bright laughter and sharing delight in each other.
Then in the breast that was his his spirit was stirred into tumult;
much did he ponder in mind and in heart as he turned it all over,
whether to rush upon them and bring death down upon every woman,
or to allow them once more with the suitors so proud to be mingling,
for the last and the uttermost time; and his heart within him was barking.
As when a bitch by her helpless whelps is standing and guarding
barks at a man she does not know and is eager to fight him,
so did his heart bark within him, enraged at the evil before him.
But he struck on his breast and rebuked his heart with a saying:
“Bear up now, heart. You endured a thing more shameless than this one
on that day when the Cyclops with ravenous strength beyond bearing
ate my powerful comrades; yet you endured, till your cunning
led you out from the cave, though you thought you were doomed there to perish.”
So he spoke, as there in his breast he upbraided his own dear heart there;
and his heart in obedience stood enduring and patient
ceaselessly; but he himself kept turning from this side to that side.
As when a man by a great fire blazing in strength and in brightness
turns a paunch full-packed with fat and with blood from one side to another,
shifting it here and there, and desires it be roasted the quicker,
so did he turn from one side to another, pondering inwardly
how he might lay hands at last on the suitors, the shameless offenders,
one man alone against many. Then Athena came close beside him,
down from the sky descending, and in form she resembled a woman.
Then she stood overhead by his head and addressed him in speech there:
“Why are you wakeful again, most wretched by far of all mortals?
This is indeed your house, and here in the house is your own wife,
and your child, such a son as a man in his prayers would desire for.”
Then resourceful Odysseus addressed her again in reply thus:
“Yes indeed, goddess, in all that you said you have spoken with justice.
But this is the thing my spirit keeps turning and weighing within me:
how I shall lay my hands on the suitors, the shameless offenders,
being alone by myself; and they are forever assembled within there.
And besides, yet another and greater concern I keep pondering:
if by the will of Zeus and by yours I should kill them and conquer,
where could I flee to escape? This is what I command you to consider.”
Then again the gray-eyed goddess Athena addressed him:
“Stubborn man, and yet one may trust in a companion far weaker,
one who is mortal indeed and does not know counsels so many.
But I am a god, and through all things continually I guard you
in every labor. And now I will tell you the matter out plainly.
Even if fifty companies of men who eat bread all around us
stood there to hem us in, with desire to destroy us in Ares,
still from them you would drive off cattle and sturdy fat sheep there.
No, let sleep now take hold upon you; for wretched it is to be watching
all through the night without rest, and from evils you soon will emerge now.”
So she spoke, and upon his eyelids she poured down sweet slumber,
and then the bright goddess of goddesses went back to Olympus.
When sleep now seized him, releasing the cares that troubled his spirit,
loosening his limbs, then his wife awoke, wise in her inward heart's knowledge,
and upon her soft bed she sat up and there she was weeping.
But when with weeping she had had her fill and had eased her own spirit,
first to Artemis then did the woman most noble of women make prayer:
“Artemis, queenly goddess, O daughter of Zeus, would that even
now you would plant in my breast your shaft and would take away spirit,
this very moment, or else let a stormwind seize and uplift me,
carrying me away down the darkened paths that are mistily hidden,
and cast me forth where the backward-flowing Ocean pours out from his waters.
Even as when the daughters of Pandareus once were taken by stormwinds:
for the gods destroyed their parents, and they were abandoned there orphaned
in the halls, and divine Aphrodite took thought for their rearing
with rich cheese and with honey so sweet and with wine that was pleasant.
Hera bestowed upon them beyond all women in measure
beauty and prudent good sense, and holy Artemis stature,
and Athena instructed their hands in the making of glorious handiwork.
But when divine Aphrodite had gone to the heights of Olympus,
asking for these young girls the fulfillment of blossoming marriage,
to Zeus who delights in the thunder, for he indeed knows all things,
both the portion and lack of portion of mortal men who are earthbound,
then in the meantime the storm-snatching Harpies swept off those maidens
and delivered them over to hateful Erinyes for service.
So may the Olympian dwellers blot me also away and make me vanish,
or may fair-tressed Artemis strike me, so that with Odysseus
seeing him, I might even go down under the hateful earth there,
and never again bring joy to the mind of an inferior man.
Yet even that evil can still be endured, whenever a person
weeps through the days, with the heart in its inmost places afflicted,
if in the nights sleep holds him; for sleep makes forgetting of all things,
good things alike and bad, when it has veiled over the eyelids;
but upon me the spirit drove even evil dreams in their swiftness.
For in this very night there slept beside me one like to himself,
such as he was when he went with the host; and my own heart within me
rejoiced, since I thought it was not a dream, but waking already.”
So she spoke, and at once came Dawn on her golden high throne there.
Then noble Odysseus took note of the sound of her weeping;
afterward in his heart he pondered, and this seemed likely within him,
that she, knowing him now, had come and stood close over his head there.
He gathered the cloak and the fleeces in which he had taken his sleeping,
set them within the hall on a chair, and the oxhide beside them
carried outdoors and laid it away; then, raising his hands, prayed to Zeus:
“Father Zeus, if in truth you gods in your will have conveyed me
over the dry land home and the wet, though you battered me sorely,
let some word be spoken to me by one of the folk here awakening
from within, and outside let another sign out of Zeus be made manifest.”
So he spoke in prayer, and Zeus of the counsels heard what he asked for.
Straightway he thundered aloud from radiant heights of Olympus,
high from the clouds; and noble Odysseus rejoiced at the portent.
Then from the house there came an omen-word from a woman at grinding,
near where the mills of the shepherd of people were ranged for his household.
There were twelve women in all who labored there at them always,
making barley meal and fine wheat flour, the marrow of mortals.
All the others indeed were asleep, since they had ground out their portion;
only one had not yet ceased, and she was by far the most feeble.
She then stopped her millstone and spoke a word, a sign for her master:
“Father Zeus, who are lord over gods and over mankind all,
loudly indeed you have thundered from out of the star-besprinkled heaven,
though there is no cloud anywhere; to someone you show this as wonder.
Bring now to fulfillment for me as well, poor wretch, this saying:
may the suitors upon this day, for the last and uttermost occasion,
take in the halls of Odysseus their welcome meal of feasting,
they who by painful labor that wears at the heart have unstrung my knees
while I prepare them their barley meal; now may they dine for the last time.”
So she spoke, and noble Odysseus rejoiced in the spoken omen,
and in the thunder of Zeus; for he said in his heart they would pay for their outrage.
Then the other serving women through noble house of Odysseus,
gathered together, kindled the tireless fire on the hearthstone.
Out from his bed uprose Telemachus, like to an immortal,
put on his clothes, and about his shoulder he slung his sharp sword there;
under his gleaming feet he bound his beautiful sandals,
took up a mighty spear with its point made keen by sharp bronze there,
stood as he went on the threshold, and spoke then to Eurycleia:
“Dear nurse, did you honor the stranger here in the house as was fitting,
with a bed and with food, or does he lie there uncared for wholly?
Such is the way of my mother, though wise in her thought she may be still:
at random she honors another of mortal men, though the worse man,
but a better man she sends away with dishonor upon him.”
Then to him in reply spoke prudent and watchful Eurycleia:
“Child, do not now accuse the guiltless woman without a cause there.
Truly he sat and drank of the wine for as long as he wished it himself,
and of food he said he no longer had hunger; she asked him about it.
But when now he began to bethink him of rest and of slumber,
she told the serving women to spread him a bed for his sleeping;
but he, like some man altogether unhappy and struck by misfortune,
would not consent to sleep on a bedstead and under the blankets,
but on an untanned oxhide and fleeces shorn from the sheepfold
slept in the forehall; and we ourselves cast a cloak over him.”
So she spoke, and Telemachus passed straight out through the great hall,
holding his spear, and along with him followed two swift dogs together.
He went on his way to the place of assembly among the Achaeans.
Then again to the serving women that godlike lady of women,
Eurycleia, daughter of Ops, son of Peisenor, called out:
“Come now, some of you sweep through the hall and put all things in order,
sprinkle it down, and on the well-fashioned chairs spread purple coverlets;
others with sponges wipe down all of the tables around them,
and cleanse the mixing bowls and the carefully wrought two-handled goblets;
others of you go after water and hasten away to the fountain,
and bring it back with speed; for not much longer away from the hall here
will the suitors remain, but early indeed they will gather,
since for all people alike this day is a day of festival.”
So she spoke, and they listened intently and did as she bade them.
Twenty of them went off to the spring with its dark-flowing water,
while the others within the house worked busily, knowing their business.
Then came in the attendants of the Achaeans; these men in the meantime
They split the firewood well and with an accomplished neatness;
then from the spring the women came back, and behind them the swineherd
came driving three fat hogs, which were the best of them all there.
These he let graze through the beautiful pens and enclosures,
then in his turn addressed Odysseus with gentle words, saying:
“Stranger, do the Achaeans regard you a little more kindly,
or do they still disgrace you all through the halls, as before now?”
Then resourceful Odysseus answered him, saying:
“If only, Eumaeus, the gods might repay them that outrage,
all that these men in their insolence plot and keep plotting,
here in another man's house; they possess not a portion of shame.”
So they were speaking such things to each other in turn there;
then Melanthius came near to them, the goatherd of goats there,
driving the goats that surpassed all the rest of the goat-herds,
as a meal for the suitors; and two herdsmen went with him.
These he tied up beneath the loud-echoing porch of the courtyard,
then in his turn addressed Odysseus with mocking words, saying:
“Stranger, are you still here in the house and still pestering people,
begging from men? Will you not yet go outside through the doorway?
Surely I do not think that the two of us now will be parted
before we have tasted our fists, since you beg with no order.
There are also other feasts among the Achaeans elsewhere.”
So he spoke, but resourceful Odysseus answered him nothing;
silently only he shook his head, while he pondered deep evil.
Then there came as the third one Philoetius, leader of men there,
driving a barren cow for the suitors, and fat goats beside her.
Ferrymen brought them across, the same men who also convey there
all other travelers too, any man who arrives there among them.
These he tied up well beneath the loud-echoing porch of the courtyard,
then standing close by the swineherd he asked him a question:
“Swineherd, who is this stranger that newly has come to our household?
What men does he declare are his own? From what people is he?
Where then are his lineage and the land of his fathers?
Luckless man, and yet in his build he resembles a ruler.
But the gods bring low the much-wandering race of men always,
whenever they spin out affliction and sorrow, even for kingship.”
So he spoke, and he stood by and clasped his right hand in greeting,
and calling to him he addressed him in winged words, saying:
“Health to you, father and stranger. May great prosperity later
yet become yours; but now you are held in abundant afflictions.
Father Zeus, there is no god other than you more destructive;
you have no pity on men, though you yourself have begotten them,
joining them up with misery and with grievous sorrows.
As I looked on him, sweat came over me, and my eyes filled with weeping,
calling Odysseus to mind, since I think that he also is wearing
rags such as these, and wanders among mankind somewhere,
if indeed he still lives and still looks on the light of the sunlight.
But if he has died already and dwells in the house of Hades,
then alas for noble Odysseus, who set me over the cattle
when I was still but a little boy in the land of Cephallenians.
Now they increase past number, and no man otherwise ever
could have so rich a breed of broad-browed cattle springing like cornfields.
Yet others command me to drive them along for themselves to consume them;
nothing at all do they care for the son in the halls of the household,
neither do they fear the revenge of the gods, for already
they are eager to portion the goods of the lord long absent.
But in my own breast this thought in my heart whirls ever around me:
it is indeed a terrible thing, while his son still is living,
going away with the cattle to visit the land of another,
passing to foreign men; but more chilling still is it, staying
here to endure the grief while one sits by cattle not one's own now.
Long since I would have gone and fled to some other great monarch,
since these things are no longer at all to be borne or endured here;
but still I think on that unhappy man, in case he should come back
out of some place and scatter the suitors all through the household.”
Then resourceful Odysseus answered him, saying:
“Cowherd, since you resemble no wicked man and no fool here,
and I myself can perceive that good sense reaches your spirit,
therefore I will tell you a thing and swear a great oath upon it:
let Zeus now know first, highest of gods, and the guest-table here too,
and the hearth of noble Odysseus, to which I have come now,
that while you are still here, Odysseus will come to his homecoming.
With your own eyes you will see it, if that is indeed your desire there:
suitors being cut down, who here are the masters and rulers.”
Then the herdsman of cattle replied to him in his answer:
“If only, stranger, the son of Cronos would bring that word to fulfillment;
then you would know what strength there is in me and what hands follow.”
So in the same way Eumaeus also prayed to all the immortals
that wise Odysseus might come back home to his own house.
Thus they were speaking such things in turn to one another.
Meanwhile the suitors were shaping for Telemachus death-doom,
but to them on the left there came as a sign a great bird then,
an eagle high in flight, and he held in his talons a dove there.
Then among them Amphinomus rose in assembly and spoke thus:
“Friends, this design of ours will not be fulfilled to the ending,
this killing of Telemachus. Come, let us think of the banquet.”
Thus spoke Amphinomus, and his counsel was pleasing among them.
Then they came to the house of Odysseus, godlike in spirit,
and they laid down their cloaks on the benches and chairs in the hall there.
Then they slaughtered great sheep and fattened goats for the feasting,
slaughtered as well sleek swine and a heifer brought from the herd there.
Then they roasted the innards and shared them about, and the wine then
mixed in the mixing-bowls; and the swineherd handed the cups round.
Bread for them Philoetius dealt, the leader of oxherds,
set in beautiful baskets, and Melanthius poured the wine there.
Then to the good fare ready and spread before them they reached out.
But Telemachus, turning his mind to guile, seated Odysseus
there in the well-built hall, by the side of the threshold of stonework,
placing a shabby stool beneath him and there a small table.
By him he set portions of innards and poured out the wine then
into a golden cup, and he spoke and addressed him in words thus:
“Here now sit among men and drink your wine in their company.
I myself will hold off from you all taunts and all violence,
all from the suitors, since this house is not common to all men,
but Odysseus’ house, and for me that man won and acquired it.
And you suitors, keep back your spirit from insults and handblows,
lest some quarrel arise and a fight be stirred in the hall here.”
Thus he spoke, and they all bit hard with their teeth on their lip-edges,
marveling at Telemachus, how he had spoken so boldly.
Then among them Antinous spoke, the son of Eupeithes:
“Though it is hard, Achaeans, let us accept what is spoken,
Telemachus’ word; for with force and with threats he addresses us.
Zeus son of Cronos would not allow it; else long before now we
would have stopped him inside these halls, though he is a clear speaker.”
Thus spoke Antinous; but he paid no heed to his speaking.
Through the town then the heralds were leading the holy hecatomb,
and the long-haired Achaeans assembled together in thronging
under the shady grove of Apollo who strikes from afar there.
Then when they had roasted the outer flesh and drawn it away there,
sharing the portions out, they feasted on the splendid banquet.
And a portion beside Odysseus the servants set down there,
equal to what they themselves had obtained as allotted among them;
for so Telemachus ordered, dear son of godlike Odysseus.
Yet Athena did not let the haughty suitors at all then
hold back from the bitter abuse that gives pain to the spirit,
so that still deeper grief might sink in the heart of Odysseus.
There among those suitors was one man knowing unlawful behavior;
Ctesippus was his name, and in Same his dwelling was founded.
He, relying indeed on possessions exceeding in splendor,
wooed the wife of Odysseus, though long he had been gone from home there.
He then spoke out among the overbearing suitors and said thus:
“Hear me, lordly suitors, so I may speak out a word to you.
Long now the stranger has had his portion, equal to all men,
as is fitting; for it is neither noble nor just to dishonor
any guest of Telemachus who may come to this house here.
But come, I also will give him a guest-gift, so that he likewise
may give some prize to the bath-attendant woman, or perhaps to
some other slave in the house of Odysseus, godlike in spirit.”
So he spoke and with his heavy hand he hurled an ox-hoof at him,
taking it up from the basket where it was lying; Odysseus
dodged it by bending his head a little aside, and he smiled then
inwardly with a sardonic smile; and it struck the strong wall there.
Then with words Telemachus sharply rebuked Ctesippus before them:
“Ctesippus, surely this turned out much better thus for your spirit:
you did not hit the stranger, for he himself dodged the missile.
Else with my sharp spear I would have struck you square in the middle,
and your father would busy himself with a tomb here, not wedding.
Therefore let no one show me outrage here in my own household.
For by now I perceive and I know every matter before me,
both the good and the worse; but before this I still was childish.
Yet even so we endure these things as we look on and suffer:
sheep being slaughtered, and wine being drunk, and bread being consumed here;
for it is hard for one man to restrain and rebuke so many.
Come then, no longer work me these evils in hostile intention.
But if now you are eager to kill me myself with the bronze blade,
even that I would choose, and it would be far better for me then
to have died than forever to look on these shameful actions,
guests being brutally handled, and women servants as well being
dragged in disgrace through the beautiful rooms of the house there.”
Thus he spoke, and they all became wholly silent in stillness.
Then at the last Damastor's son, Agelaus, addressed them:
“Friends, no man could justly take offense at a fair-spoken saying
and answer back in contention, fastening on it with harsh words.
Do not be bullying this stranger at all, nor any other
of the household slaves in the halls of godlike Odysseus.
But to Telemachus I would speak, and also his mother,
speaking gently, if this might please the hearts of both of them.
So long as your spirit within your breasts still kept on hoping
wise Odysseus would return again to this house here,
so long there was no blame if she waited and held off
these suitors here in the house, since this indeed was the better,
if Odysseus returned and came back home to his dwelling.
But now this much is plain: he is no longer returning.
Come then, sit beside your mother and tell her these matters:
let her wed whatever man is best and offers the most there,
so that you may rejoice and possess all your father's belongings,
eating and drinking, while she keeps the house of another.”
Then in reply to him spoke prudent Telemachus clearly:
“No, by Zeus, Agelaus, and by the griefs of my father,
who somewhere far from Ithaca either is dead or is wandering,
I am not delaying my mother's marriage; indeed I exhort her
to wed whomsoever she will, and I will give countless gifts too.
But I am ashamed to send her away from the hall against her will there
by a compelling word; may a god never bring this to pass for me.”
So spoke Telemachus. Then Pallas Athena among them
stirred in the suitors unquenchable laughter and warped their perceptions.
They by now with jaws that were no longer their own fell to laughing,
and they were eating flesh that was smeared all over with blood there;
and their eyes were filled up with tears, and their hearts sensed a wailing.
Then among them spoke godlike Theoclymenus, saying:
“Ah, wretched men, what evil is this that you suffer among you?
Night has wrapped round your heads and faces and down to your knees too.
Wailing bursts into flame, and the cheeks are all drenched with weeping;
walls are bespattered with blood, and the beautiful beams in the house there.
The forecourt is full of phantoms, the courtyard also is crowded,
streaming down into Erebus under the gloom and the darkness;
out of the sky the sun has perished, and evil mist spreads on us.”
So he spoke, and they all at him broke into sweet laughing.
Then Eurymachus, Polybus' son, began speaking among them:
“The stranger is mad, this fellow newly arrived from elsewhere.
Come, young men, quickly now, escort him out of the doorway
to the assembly place, since these things seem to him like night here.”
Then in reply to him spoke godlike Theoclymenus:
“Eurymachus, I do not ask that you furnish escorts for me.
I have eyes of my own and ears and both of my feet here,
and within my breast a mind well-fashioned and nothing unworthy.
Trusting in these, I shall go out of doors, since I see evil
coming on all of you, an evil that no one among you
of the suitors can flee from or ever avoid in the household
of godlike Odysseus, while you outrage men and plot folly.”
Having spoken, he went from the well-inhabited dwelling,
and he came to Peiraeus, who welcomed him gladly before him.
Then the suitors all, glancing each one toward one another,
baited Telemachus now, with laughter directed at strangers.
Thus would a man among those overbearing young suitors be saying:
“Telemachus, no man has guests more troublesome than yours are.
See what a fellow is here, this importunate wandering beggar,
wanting bread and wine, yet knowing nothing of labor
and nothing of strength, but merely a burden of earth here.
Then this other man too stood up to play at the prophet.
But if you would listen to me, this would be far more profitable:
let us put these guests aboard a ship with many row-benches
and send them off to Sicily, where they would fetch you good payment.”
Thus the suitors were speaking, but he took no heed of their sayings;
silently he kept gazing at his father, waiting forever
till at last he would set his hands on the shameless suitors.
Meanwhile she, in the facing place, had set down her beautiful chair there,
Icarius' daughter, the circumspect Penelope, sitting,
and she heard in the hall the speech of each one of the men there.
For they had prepared their dinner with laughter and with loud mockery,
sweet to the taste and abundant, since they had slaughtered so many.
Yet there could never have been any supper more joyless than that one,
such as a goddess and a mighty man soon were about to
set before them; for first they themselves had devised what was shameful.
