The Odyssey — Book IX

“I am Odysseus”: the Cicones, the Lotus-eaters, and the Cyclops.

Then resourceful Odysseus spoke and addressed him in answer:
“Lord Alcinous, most renowned among all of the people,
truly it is a beautiful thing to attend to a singer
such as the man we have here, with a voice like the gods in its music.
I will declare that no other accomplishment carries more beauty
than when delight and rejoicing possess the whole people together,
while the banqueters sit through the hall and attend to the singer,
each in appropriate order, and tables beside them are laden
thickly with bread and with meats, while the cupbearer draws from the wine bowl,
carries the wine all around and pours it to fill every goblet.
This in my heart and my thinking appears the most beautiful vision.
Yet you have turned your desire to asking about my grievous
troubles, so I may lament and may groan all the more as I tell them.
What shall I speak of at first and what last in relating the story?
Gods who inhabit the heavens have given me sorrows uncounted.
First I shall tell you the name that I bear, so you also may know me,
and so hereafter, if I should flee from the pitiless death-day,
I may be guest-friend to you, though my house lies far in the distance.
I am Odysseus, Laertes’ son, known to all human people
through my designs and my cunning; my fame has ascended to heaven.
Ithaca is my home, lying clear beneath Neriton’s mountain,
tall and trembling with leaves, and around it are numerous islands,
lying together in clusters, each one very close to another,
Same and forested Zacynthus and Dulichium with them.
Ithaca lies very low and the furthest away on the sea-way,
facing the darkness of evening, while all of the rest face the sunlight,
facing the dawn; it is rugged, but raises good men, and I cannot
see any sweeter appearance at all than the land of one’s fathers.
Queenly Calypso, the radiant goddess, would hold me beside her
there in the hollow cave, for she longed to possess me as husband;
likewise Circe detained me within her halls in her island,
cunning Aeaean lady, and longed to possess me as husband.
Yet they could never persuade the heart in my breast to remain there.
So it is true there is nothing more sweet than the land of one’s fathers,
nothing more sweet than one’s parents, though someone possesses a wealthy
house in a foreign country, afar from the people who bore him.
Come, I shall tell you as well of the homeward journey and all the
sorrows that Zeus laid on me as homeward I traveled from Trojans.
Out of Ilium wind carried me to the land of Cicones,
into Ismarus; there I sacked the town and destroyed all the men there.
Out of the city we carried their wives and abundant possessions,
sharing them all, so no man through me was deprived of his portion.
Then I commanded, be sure, that we make our retreat with swift footfall;
great fools, they would not obey me, and paid no regard to my counsel.
Much wine there they were drinking, and many sheep on the seashore
they cut down, and shambling cattle with horns that were curved at the forehead.
Meanwhile, Cicone warriors cried to Cicone neighbors,
those who were living inland, more numerous and better fighters,
skilled in engaging humanity out of the war chariots,
also on foot when the need for the close-standing battle compelled them.
They came thick as the leaves and the flowers that grow in their season,
early at morning; and then an evil doom sent by great Zeus
stood at our side, unlucky men, to load us with manifold sorrows.
Close to the fast ships they formed their battalions and entered the battle;
each side cast at the other with spears that were headed with bronze-work.
While it was morning and still the sacred daylight was growing,
so long we held them at bay and remained, though more were against us;
yet when the sun had turned toward the time when the oxen are loosened,
then the Cicones routed Achaeans and mastered our army.
Six strong-greaved companions from each of the ships they had slaughtered;
all of the others escaped from the doom that is death and destruction.
There we continued our sailing away with the heart full of sorrow,
glad to be free from death though our well-loved comrades had perished.
Yet I permitted the curving vessels to journey no further,
not till we called three times on each of our pitiful comrades,
those who had died on the plain, struck down by the men of Cicones.
Zeus who was gathering cloud roused North Wind against all our vessels,
driving a howling squall and covering land and the sea-way
under a cloud, and the night rose suddenly out of the heavens.
Ships were carried along sideways; the sails that they carried were tattered,
ripped by the strength of the wind into three and four pieces of canvas.
Down in the ships we lowered the sails in our terror of death there,
rowing the vessels with power to take them in close to the dry land.
There for two nights long and two whole days without ceasing
down we lay, consuming our hearts with exhaustion and sorrow.
Yet when the beautiful-haired Dawn brought the third day upon us,
setting the masts upright, we opened the white sails above them,
sitting below, while the winds and the helmsmen directed the vessels.
Then I had come without harm to the country I call my own country,
but as I rounded Malea the wave and the sea-current caught me,
while the North Wind drove me away from my course and afar from Cythera.
Nine days there I was carried along by the ruinous storm winds,
over the fish-thronged sea; on the tenth day we came to the country
held by the Lotus-eaters, a people whose food is a flower.
There we set foot on the dry land and drew up an ample supply of
water, and quickly my men took their meal at the side of the swift ships.
Then, when we tasted our measure of food and the drink we were given,
I sent several companions ahead of the others to find out
what kind of men in the country were eating their bread on the earth there.
Two men I chose for the journey and added a third as their herald.
Straightway they went and encountered the men of the Lotus-eaters.
These Lotus-eaters intended no death for the men who had found them;
rather they gave my companions some lotus flower to taste there.
Whoever ate of the honey-sweet fruit of the lotus among them
wanted no longer to carry us word or return to his vessel;
there they desired to stay in the midst of the Lotus-eaters,
feeding upon the lotus and letting the thought of homecoming vanish.
These men I forced to return, though they wept as I brought them to shipboard,
dragging them under the benches and binding them there in the hollow
ships, and I ordered the rest of my faithful companions to hurry,
all of them boarding the swift-faring ships with no further delay there,
lest any other should eat of the lotus and lose his homecoming.
Straightway the men came aboard and sat at the oarlocks in order;
sitting in orderly fashion, they struck the gray sea with the oar-blades.
There we continued our sailing away with the heart full of sorrow,
coming at last to the land of the lawless and proud Cyclopes,
overbearing people who trust in the deathless immortals.
Nothing they plant with their hands and no ground they plow for a harvest;
everything grows for the people without being planted or plowed there,
wheat and barley and vines that are carrying heavy grape-clusters,
swelling for them into wine through the rain Zeus sends from the heavens.
Neither assemblies for council have they nor established commandments;
rather they live on the crowns of the high and magnificent mountains,
dwelling in hollow caves, and every man gives the law there
over his children and wives, and they care not at all for each other.
Outside the harbor extends an island covered with scrubland,
neither beside the Cyclopes’ land nor a great way away from it,
forested, where an uncountable number of wild goats are breeding.
No human footstep disturbs them and scares them away in their grazing;
no hunters ever approach them, the men who must suffer great hardship
moving among the high forests and ranging the peaks of the mountains.
Neither do flocks hold the island nor fields that are furrowed by plowing;
unsown and unplowed it remains all the days of existence,
widowed of mortals, while only the bleating goats feed upon it.
No red-cheeked vessels are held by the men of the race of Cyclopes;
neither are shipwrights among them who might by their labor construct them
vessels with excellent benches to answer to every occasion,
traveling over the sea to the cities of all other people,
such as humanity often will cross in their vessels to visit.
Craftsmen like these would have made of the island a beautiful settlement;
it is not bad, but would bear every crop in its proper season.
Soft, well-watered meadows extend by the shores of the gray sea,
where growing vines would be found forever undying and fruitful;
level the plowland is there, where an excellent harvest would always
stand to be reaped in the season, for rich is the soil lying under.
There is a harbor with safety from storms, where no cables are needed,
neither the casting of anchor-stones nor the fastening of stern ropes;
there one may beach a ship and wait for the time when the sailors’
hearts move them onward and breezes arise to be carried behind them.
There at the head of the harbor a beautiful spring gives its water,
out of a cave, while black-colored poplars are growing around it.
There we came sailing, and some god guided our passage among them,
deep in the nighttime, while nothing ahead could be seen by our eyesight;
round all the vessels a dense mist lay, and the moon from the heavens
shed not a light, since the whole of its face was enclosed within cloudbanks.
No one among us perceived that the island was there with his eyesight,
neither perceived we the long-rolling waves that approached the dry shoreline,
not till the well-benched vessels had run themselves up on the beaches.
Then, when the ships had been beached, we took all of the sails from above them,
stepping ourselves to the surf-line there at the edge of the sea-way;
there we lay down to sleep and awaited the beautiful dawning.
When early Dawn had appeared with her beautiful rose-colored fingers,
then we explored all around the island and marveled in wonder.
Nymphs who were daughters of Zeus who possesses the aegis awakened
goats in the mountains, so all my companions might find them for supper.
Straightway we carried the curved bows out of the ships and the long spears
fitted with sockets, and then we arranged ourselves in three parties,
shooting the goats; quickly the god gave the game that our hearts had desired.
Twelve ships traveled beside me, and there to every ship were
nine goats given by lot, while ten were selected as my share.
So then all day long till the sun and the light were descending,
there we sat feasting on meat past counting and sweet wine beside it.
Red-colored wine had not yet been spent from the holds of the vessels;
some still remained, since every crew had drawn off an abundance
into the two-handled jars when we captured the holy Cicone fortress.
There we looked out at the nearby country that held the Cyclopes,
seeing their smoke and hearing the voices of people and sheep-flocks.
Then the sun entered the west and the darkness descended around us;
there we lay down to sleep on the surf-line there at the seashore.
When early Dawn had appeared with her beautiful rose-colored fingers,
then I called all my men in assembly and spoke to them openly:
“All of the rest of you wait in this place, my companions and faithful;
I with the crew in my ship alone shall make trial of the people,
going to learn who the people are there and the manner they follow,
whether they are overbearing and savage and strangers to justice,
or they are friendly to strangers, with god-fearing hearts in their bodies.”
Thus having spoken, I boarded my ship and commanded my comrades
into the vessel to board in their turn and release all the stern ropes.
Straightway the men came aboard and sat at the oarlocks in order;
sitting in orderly fashion, they struck the gray sea with the oar-blades.
Yet when we came to the place, which was not far away on the water,
there at the edge of the land and beside the salt sea we discovered
one lofty cave overhung with the laurels, and numerous livestock,
sheep and goats, would be penned there at night; and a high-rising courtyard
ran all around it, constructed of stones dug deep in the earth there,
also of towering pines and magnificent high-crested oak trees.
There slept a monstrous man who was shepherding all of his livestock
only himself and apart; with others he kept no companionship,
standing aloof, for the heart in his body was stranger to law there.
He was fashioned a monstrous wonder, and had no resemblance
to any man who eats bread, but looked like a forested mountain
crag that is standing alone, high over the neighboring ridges.
Then I commanded the rest of my faithful companions to stay there,
close to the ship, and provide their defense for the ship while I journeyed,
choosing the twelve most excellent men from among my companions.
Thus I went forward, and carried a goatskin filled with dark wine there,
sweet wine given to me by Maron, the son of Euanthes,
priest of Apollo, the god who protected the town of Ismarus,
since we protected the priest with his child and the wife of his household,
holding him sacred, for there in the forested grove he was living,
grove of Phoebus Apollo. He gave me magnificent presents:
seven full talents of gold that was wrought with the skill of the craftsman,
also a mixing bowl made wholly of silver he gave me;
then he drew wine into twelve great jars with two handles,
sweet and unmixed, like a drink for the gods. Not a slave in the household,
neither a serving woman, had knowledge that such wine existed;
only the man and the wife he loved and a single housekeeper.
Whenever they drank of this honey-sweet red-colored wine there,
one cup he filled and poured into twenty full measures of water;
sweetly the fragrance arose from the bowl where the wine had been mingled,
marvelous, and no pleasure remained in abstaining from drinking.
Thereof I filled a great skin and carried provisions beside it,
held in a sack, for my proud heart even then was foreboding
someone would come upon us who carried tremendous power in his body,
savage of spirit and knowing no judgment or law among mortals.
Rapidly then we approached the great cave and discovered him absent;
out in the pasture he shepherded all of his fat-lying livestock.
Into the cave we went and gazed on all things in wonder:
crates that were heavy with cheeses and pens that were crowded with young ones,
filled with the lambs and the kids, each kind being folded apart there,
firstborn kept to themselves and those of the middle birth separate,
newborn kept to themselves, and the vessels were swimming with whey there,
buckets and bowls fashioned well, all the vessels he used in the milking.
There from the first my companions entreated and urgently begged me,
taking the cheeses to leave and return; then rapidly driving
kids and the lambs from the pens where they waited, to take them to shipboard,
sail once again with the swift ship out on the salt-colored sea-way.
Yet I refused to attend to their words, though it had been far better,
not until I should behold him myself and discover if guest-gifts
he would provide; his appearance would bring my companions no gladness.
There we enkindled a fire and gave to the gods an oblation,
taking the cheeses ourselves and eating; we sat there awaiting
him till at last he came shepherding homeward and carried a mighty
weight of the dry wood to use when the time should arrive for his supper.
Down in the cavern he hurled it, producing a thunderous crashing;
we in our terror withdrew to the furthest recess of the cavern.
Into the wide cave he drove all his flocks that were fattened for milking,
every ewe and she-goat, while the males he had left in the courtyard,
rams and the he-goats remaining outside in the deep-sided enclosure.
Then he lifted on high and positioned a giant rock for the doorway,
massive in weight; not even two-and-twenty excellent wagons,
each with four wheels, could have lifted that stone from the ground there,
such was the towering cliff of the rock that he set in the entrance.
Sitting thereafter, he milked every ewe and the bleating she-goats,
all in appropriate order, and placed every young one beneath them.
Straightway then he curdled one half of the gleaming white milk there,
gathering all and storing the curds in the baskets of wicker;
half he positioned in vessels, so always the drink might be ready
there to be taken and used at the time when he wanted his supper.
Then, when he rapidly finished the whole of the work he was doing,
lighting the fire, he saw us and asked us a question directly:
“Strangers, who are you, and whence have you sailed over watery pathways?
Are you engaged upon business, or do you wander without aim,
just as sea-plundering men, who are roaming across the salt water,
risking their lives while they carry affliction to people of strange lands?”
Thus did he speak, and the hearts in the depth of our bodies were broken,
frightened by depth of his voice and the monstrous form of his body.
Even so, I spoke to the giant and answered his question:
“We are Achaeans driven away from our course out of Troy-land,
carried by every wind that is found on the great gulf of ocean.
Homeward we traveled, but came by a different road and a strange path;
Zeus, I suppose, has chosen to fashion the matter in this way.
We are proud to be people of Atreus’ son Agamemnon,
whose fame now is the greatest of all things beneath the broad heaven,
since was the city he sacked so great and so many the people
whom he destroyed. We have come for our part to embrace both your knees here,
hoping that you will provide us with friendship or give us another
gift, as the right and the custom demand for the welcoming stranger.
Mighty one, honor the gods; we stand in your presence as suppliants.
Zeus is avenger of all who arrive as suppliants and strangers,
Zeus of the Strangers, who travels beside all guests deserving of honor.”
Thus did I speak, and he answered me straightway with pitiless spirit:
“Surely a fool you must be, foreign man, or have come from a far land,
telling me I should fear all the gods and avoid their displeasure.
We of the Cyclopes care not for Zeus who possesses the aegis,
neither for blessed gods, for greatly by far we declare we are better.
Never to flee from the hatred of Zeus would I spare you or spare your
comrades, unless the heart in my breast of its own should command me.
Tell me the place where you moored your beautifully fashioned ship when
coming, whether afar at the end of the shore or nearby, so I know it.”
Thus did he speak to make trial, but much did I know, and he caught me
not in his snare; and I answered the monster with words of deception:
“Lord of the earth-shaking waters Poseidon destroyed my fine vessel,
driving it into the rocks at the outermost edge of your country;
there on a headland he hurled it, and wind from the sea drove it inward.
Only myself and the men who are here fled the final destruction.”
Thus did I speak, and he answered me not from his pitiless spirit;
springing upon us, he stretched out his hands at the men who were near him,
snatching up two at a time, and like puppies he dashed them on ground there;
brains poured out on the earth and wetted the soil all around them.
Tearing them limb from limb, he made ready his supper and ate them,
just like a lion bred in the mountains, and nothing was left there,
neither the entrails nor flesh nor the bones that were heavy with marrow.
We in our weeping raised up our hands to great Zeus in the heavens,
seeing the terrible deed, while helplessness captured our spirits.
Then, when the Cyclops had filled his enormous belly completely,
feeding on flesh of humanity, drinking unmixed milk beside it,
stretched in the cavern he lay in the midst of the sheep he had gathered.
Then in the depth of my own great-hearted spirit I pondered,
going up close and unsheathing the sharpened sword at my thigh there,
stabbing him straight through the chest where the midriff encloses the liver,
searching by touch with my hand; but another reflection restrained me.
There we ourselves would have died in the pitiless final destruction,
since we could never have pushed from the entrance by strength of our two hands
that giant stone he had lifted and placed at the high cave opening.
So we continued in groaning and waited for beautiful Dawn-light.
When early Dawn had appeared with her beautiful rose-colored fingers,
then he enkindled his fire and milked all the excellent livestock,
all in appropriate order, and placed every young one beneath them.
Then, when he rapidly finished the whole of the work he was doing,
snatching up two at a time once again, he made ready his breakfast.
Then, when he fed, he drove all of the fat-lying flocks from the cavern,
lifting the giant door-stone away with an effortless movement,
setting it back like a man who replaces the lid on a quiver.
Whistling loud, then the Cyclops directed his fat-lying livestock
up to the mountain, while I in the cave brooded deeply on evil,
somehow to make him repay, if Athena should grant me the glory.
This, as I pondered, appeared in my thinking to be the best counsel.
Close to a pen there lay an enormous club of the Cyclops,
fashioned of green olive wood; he had cut it to carry thereafter,
once it was seasoned. We looked at its size and compared it in judgment
there to the mast of a black-hulled ship with two decades of rowers,
one broad-bellied merchantman crossing the great gulf of ocean;
such was the length and the thickness the timber presented to eyesight.
Standing beside it, I cut off a fathom of length from the timber,
gave it to all my companions and told them to smooth down the surface.
Smoothly they fashioned it; standing beside them, I sharpened the far end,
then in the fire’s blaze I hardened the point of the timber.
Carefully then I laid it away and concealed it beneath all the dung there,
litter that lay in a thick and abundant heap through the cavern.
Then I commanded the rest of the men to determine by lot-cast
who should have courage beside me to lift up the stake we had fashioned,
grind it around in his eye when the sweetness of sleep came upon him.
Lots chose exactly the men I myself would have wanted beside me,
four men chosen, and I placed myself in the group as the fifth man.
He came back in the evening and shepherded beautiful-fleeced sheep,
driving the whole of his fat-lying flock to the depth of the cavern,
every animal, leaving not one in the deep-sided courtyard,
whether some knowledge possessed him, or god had commanded the action.
Then he lifted on high and positioned the giant rock for the doorway;
sitting thereafter, he milked every ewe and the bleating she-goats,
all in appropriate order, and placed every young one beneath them.
Then, when he rapidly finished the whole of the work he was doing,
snatching up two at a time once again, he made ready his supper.
Then I drew close to the Cyclops and spoke, while I carried the ivy-
wood drinking bowl full of black-colored wine in my hands as an offering:
“Cyclops, drink now the wine, since on flesh of humanity you have
fed, so you learn the kind of the drink that our vessel was carrying.
This as a pouring I brought in the hope you might pity and send me
homeward; instead, you are raging beyond any limit of outrage.
Pitiless creature, how ever again shall a man out of all the
many draw near you, since all you have done is beyond any measure?”
Thus did I speak; he received it and drank, and the drink made him terribly
glad in its sweetness; again he demanded a second full measure:
“Give me still more and be generous; tell me the name you are called by,
here and at once, so I give you a gift that shall gladden your spirit.
Grain-giving plowland produces the wine for the men of Cyclopes,
excellent clusters, and rain sent by Zeus makes the grapes full and swollen;
this wine is truly a rivulet flowing with nectar and ambrosia.”
Thus did he speak, and again I provided the fire-bright wine there.
Three times I carried and gave it; three times in his folly he drained it.
Then, when the wine had encircled the Cyclops’ thoughts and his reason,
sweetly as honey I spoke to the monster and offered an answer:
“Cyclops, you ask me the name I am gloriously called by; then I shall
tell you, and you shall provide me the gift you have promised in welcome.
Nobody is my name, and Nobody everyone calls me,
mother and father alike and all of my other companions.”
Thus did I speak; he responded at once with a pitiless spirit:
“Nobody I shall consume at the last, after all his companions,
eating the others before him; and that is the gift I shall give you.”
Thus did he speak; reeling backward, he fell, and he lay with his massive
neck bent over his shoulder; and sleep, the subduer of all things,
seized him; and out of his gullet the wine came streaming and gushing,
mingled with gobbets of human flesh as he drunkenly vomited.
Then in the thick ash I planted the stake to grow hot in the fire,
speaking to put a bold courage in all my companions around me,
lest any man should draw back from the work in his terror and weakness.
Then, when the olive stake in the fire, although it was green wood,
nearly had caught into flame and glowed terribly through its full measure,
out of the fire I brought it, while all my companions around me
stood; and divinity breathed in our bodies a courage tremendous.
Taking the stake of the olive, sharpened to end in a point there,
into his eye they rammed it; and I, putting weight from above it,
turned it around, like a man who is drilling a timber for shipwork,
while underneath him companions continually keep the drill running,
pulling a strap they hold at both ends, and it spins without ceasing.
So with the fire-pointed stake we took hold and revolved it
there in his eye, and the blood boiled out all around it from hotness;
blast of the burning completely singed off every eyelid and eyebrow,
while the great eyeball was burning and roots there were crackling with fire.
Just as a smith will dip a magnificent ax head or adze blade
into the cold water, making a terrible hiss as he tempers it,
since it is tempering that gives to iron metal its power,
so round the olive timber his eye made a terrible hissing.
Then he cried out in a terrible giant voice, and the cavern
rang; we withdrew in our terror; he wrenched the great stake from his eye there,
all of it fouled with the blood that was streaming from out of the eyeball,
hurled it away, while his arms in a furious agony flailed there,
crying aloud to the Cyclopes living around him in caverns,
those who made homes all along the magnificent wind-beaten highlands.
Hearing his cries, they arrived from every direction around him,
standing outside of the cave and inquiring what trouble possessed him:
“Why, Polyphemus, what pain makes you cry out this way in the darkness,
calling throughout the ambrosial night and preventing our slumber?
Surely no mortal is driving your flocks off against your intention?
Surely no one destroys you by cunning or violence against you?”
Out of the cave strong Polyphemus spoke to them, giving an answer:
“Friends, now Nobody kills me by cunning, and not by his power!”
Then in their turn they responded to him with the words that took wing there:
“If no one forces you now, when you sit all alone in the cavern,
sickness from mighty Zeus must possess you, and none can escape it.
Pray to Poseidon our father, the lord who encircles the earth-land.”
Thus did they speak as they went; and the heart in my body was laughing,
seeing my false name and flawless design had completely deceived him.
Yet in his agony, groaning and heaving, the Cyclops was groping,
feeling with hands as he lifted the stone from the cave’s great entrance.
Down in the doorway he sat with his two arms widely extended,
hoping to catch any man who attempted to flee with the sheep-flocks;
such was the fool he expected, perhaps, he would find me to be there.
Yet I was planning the means by which all things might come to the best end,
somehow discovering freedom from death for the whole of my comrades
also myself; every guile and device I was weaving together,
just as a man for his life, since the mighty affliction was near us.
This, as I pondered, appeared in my thinking to be the best counsel.
Rams were there with an excellent feeding, and heavy with thick wool,
beautiful, mighty animals, covered with dark-violet fleeces.
Silently these I bound in a group with the pliable willow
withes whereon that monstrous and lawless creature was sleeping,
three in a group, with the middle ram carrying one of my comrades,
other two walking upon either side to protect him from capture.
Thus every man had three, but for me there remained a great ram there,
one that was far beyond all other sheep in the whole of the livestock.
Catching the ram by his back, I curled underneath the great shaggy
belly and waited, my hands in the marvelous fleece of the ram there
twisted and tightly held, while my heart remained steadfast and patient.
So we continued in groaning and waited for beautiful Dawn-light.
When early Dawn had appeared with her beautiful rose-colored fingers,
then all the male animals poured out of the cave to the pasture;
females not milked were bleating around all the pens, since their udders
almost were bursting. Their master, afflicted by terrible anguish,
felt with his hands every back of the sheep that arose and went outward;
yet in his foolishness never he learned that the men were beneath them,
bound underneath the breasts of his own woolly sheep as they traveled.
Last in the flock that magnificent ram made his way through the doorway,
burdened by wool and by me and the thoughts that were crowding within me.
Strong Polyphemus felt over the ram and addressed him directly:
“Sweetheart, my old ram, why are you last out of all of the flock now,
passing outside of the cave? You were never before one to linger;
always the first, taking long strides outward to graze on the tender
flowering grass, and the first of the animals reaching the river,
first in your longing to turn once again to the fold in the evening.
Now you are last of them all. Do you grieve for the eye of your master,
blinded by one worthless man and the pitiful men who attended,
after with wine he had broken my wits and my reason completely,
Nobody, who has not yet, I assure you, escaped his destruction?
If you could think as I do, if only a voice could be given you,
telling me where that man flees to avoid my avenging anger,
then would his brains be dashed on the floor and be scattered around the
cave, and the heart in my body would find some release from the evil
brought on me now by this worthless and weakling Nobody creature.”
Thus having spoken, he sent the great ram from himself through the doorway.
Then, when we came a small distance away from the cave and the courtyard,
first I released myself from the ram and then freed my companions.
Rapidly then we drove all the long-legged sheep that were fattened,
often looking behind as we turned, till at last we arrived at the vessel.
We were a welcome appearance to all our beloved companions,
we who escaped from destruction, but all for the dead men lamented.
This I allowed not; frowning, I held back the tears of each man there,
ordering all of them rapidly into the ship to be throwing
excellent-fleeced sheep in abundance and sail on the salt-colored water.
Straightway the men came aboard and sat at the oarlocks in order;
sitting in orderly fashion, they struck the gray sea with the oar-blades.
Yet when we came as far out from the land as a loud-shouting voice goes,
then I called out to the Cyclops and mocked him with taunting language:
“Cyclops, the men you intended to eat with tremendous exertion
there in the hollow cave were not weak man’s companions, as it proved.
Surely your wicked deeds were destined to find and repay you,
pitiless creature, who shrank not from eating the guests in your household;
therefore has Zeus now punished you, he and the other immortals.”
Thus did I speak, and it angered the heart in his body still further.
Tearing the peak from a mighty mountain, he hurled it against us,
sending it down just in front of the dark-blue prow of the vessel,
barely missing the end of the steering oar as it landed.
Sea was uplifted beneath the great rock that had fallen upon it;
backwash straightway carried the vessel back into the dry land,
flooding from out of the deep, and it drove us again to the shoreline.
Yet in my two hands I seized up a long pole there from the vessel,
pushing her outward, and urgently roused my companions around me,
telling them all to bend into oars and escape from the evil,
nodding repeatedly hard with my head; at the oars they were bending.
Yet when we came twice as far out over the salt-colored water,
then once again I intended to call; but the men who were round me
tried with their honey-sweet language to hold me, this man and another:
“Pitiless man, why ever provoke such a savage and wild one,
one who by throwing a rock in the sea has already propelled our
ship once again to the shore, where we thought our destruction was certain?
If he had heard anyone speaking aloud or a voice of a mortal,
heads he would shatter together with all of the timbers of shipwork,
casting a jagged boulder, since such is the distance he throws them.”
Thus did they speak, but they never persuaded my great-hearted spirit;
once more I called to the monster, with anger at heart as I spoke there:
“Cyclops, if anyone born among mortal humanity asks you
who brought the shameful and blinding destruction that fell on your eyesight,
tell him Odysseus, sacker of cities, has blinded your vision,
son of Laertes, whose house is established in Ithaca’s country.”
Thus did I speak; with a groan he addressed me and offered an answer:
“Sorrow, an ancient prophecy now has arrived at completion!
Once there was here a prophetic man, both mighty and noble,
Telemus, son of Eurymus, one who excelled in his seercraft,
practicing prophecy till he grew old in the land of Cyclopes.
He told me all of these things would arrive at fulfillment hereafter,
how I should lose all my eyesight by hand of a man named Odysseus.
Yet I expected a mighty and beautiful man to approach me,
one who was clothed in his body with strength that was greatly tremendous;
now one little and worthless and utterly powerless weakling
blinded my eye after crushing my wits through the wine he provided.
Come to me, lord Odysseus, so I may give you a guest-gift;
I shall entreat the renowned Earth-shaker to grant your returning.
I am his son, and the god has declared he is father who sired me.
He, if he wills it, himself shall heal me, and no other being,
neither the blessed divinities nor any man who is mortal.”
Thus did he speak, and I spoke to the monster and offered an answer:
“Would I possessed such strength to deprive you of spirit and lifetime,
sending you down to the house of great Hades, as surely as even
lord of the earth-shaking waters shall never restore the eye you have lost here.”
Thus did I speak; then he prayed to Poseidon, the lord of the sea-depth,
stretching his two hands up to the heavens that glittered with starlight:
“Hear me, Poseidon who circles the earth-land, dark-haired immortal;
if I am truly your son and you say you are father who sired me,
grant that Odysseus, sacker of cities, shall never arrive home,
son of Laertes, whose house is established in Ithaca’s country.
Yet if his destiny grants that he see the beloved companions,
coming again to his well-built house in the land of his fathers,
late may he come and in evil condition, with all comrades perished,
there on another man’s ship, and discover affliction at home there.”
Thus did he speak in his prayer, and the dark-haired god heard the prayer.
Then once again the great Cyclops took up an even greater
rock and he whirled and released it with measureless strength in his throwing,
bringing it down just behind the dark-blue stern of the vessel,
barely missing the end of the steering oar as it landed.
Sea was uplifted beneath the great rock that had fallen upon it;
wave carried forward the vessel and drove it toward the far island.
Then, when we came to the island where all of the other well-benched ships
waited together, and where all around them our faithful companions
sat there lamenting and always awaited the sight of our vessel,
there on the sands we drove in the ship and secured it on shoreline,
stepping ourselves to the surf-line there at the edge of the sea-way.
Taking the Cyclops’ flocks from the hollow and curve-sided vessel,
sharing we gave every man his portion, and none was defrauded.
Yet that magnificent ram my strong-greaved companions allotted
only to me when the livestock was shared, as a special possession.
There on the shore I presented the ram to the black-clouded great Zeus,
child of great Cronos and lord over all, burning thighs as an offering.
Yet he regarded it not, for already he pondered how all my
well-benched vessels should perish together with faithful companions.
So then all day long till the sun and the light were descending,
there we sat feasting on meat past counting and sweet wine beside it.
Then the sun entered the west and the darkness descended around us;
there we lay down to sleep on the surf-line there at the seashore.
When early Dawn had appeared with her beautiful rose-colored fingers,
then I aroused my companions and gave them commandment to enter
into the ships in their turn and release all the stern ropes behind them.
Straightway the men came aboard and sat at the oarlocks in order;
sitting in orderly fashion, they struck the gray sea with the oar-blades.
There we continued our sailing away with the heart full of sorrow,
glad to be free from death though our well-loved comrades had perished.
