The Odyssey — Book XIV

The hut of Eumaeus: the slave's welcome, the second Cretan tale, the cloak story.

But from the harbor he climbed by a rough and trackless footpath,
over the wooded land by the heights, where Pallas Athena
had shown him the noble swineherd, the man who most deeply
cared for the goods and estate that noble Odysseus had gathered.
There in the forecourt he found him seated, where round him a farmyard
had been built high up, in a place with a wide view about it,
fair and spacious and broad with a running way; and the swineherd
built it himself for the swine of his lord who had gone from the island,
with no help from the mistress nor help from old lord Laertes,
built it of quarried stones and topped it with thorn of wild pearwood;
and outside he had driven stakes all around on both sides there,
thick-set and crowded, split from the dark heartwood of the oak tree.
Inside the yard he had fashioned a dozen pens for the swine there,
close by one another, as bedding and lairs for the she-swine;
and in each pen fifty sows that lay upon the ground there
had been enclosed, breeding females; the boars slept outside them,
many fewer in number, for these were consumed and diminished
by the godlike suitors at feasts, since ever the swineherd
sent them the best of the well-fattened hogs of the drove there;
and the boars were in number three hundred and sixty together.
Beside them four hounds, like savage beasts, always were sleeping,
dogs that the swineherd had reared, that captain and master of servants.
He himself was fitting and binding sandals under his own feet,
cutting the leather from hide of an ox, well cured and shining.
The others had gone, each man in a different way, with the gathered
swine, the three; but the fourth he had sent to the city perforce there,
driving a hog to the arrogant suitors against his own wishing,
so that, after the slaughter, their hearts might be glutted with meat there.
Suddenly then the loud-baying dogs caught sight of Odysseus;
these with barking and yelping rushed straight upon him; but Odysseus
sat himself down in his craft, and his staff fell loose from his hand there.
There by his own stockyard he would have endured a disgraceful
wound and affliction, but quickly the swineherd ran after them,
darting through the foredoor in haste, and the hide dropped out of his hand there.
Shouting aloud, he drove off the dogs, each one in a different
direction, pelting them hard with a thick rain of stones, and he told him:
“Old man, the dogs came close indeed to tearing and mangling
you all at once, and on me you would have poured down shame and reproach there.
Yet on me the gods have bestowed other griefs and lamentings;
for I sit here grieving and mourning a godlike master,
while for other men I tend and fatten the tusked swine for eating;
and he somewhere wanders in want of food, in his longing,
over the people and city of men who speak alien language,
if indeed he still lives and still looks on the light of the sunlight.
But come now, follow me, old sir, and let us go to the shelter,
so that you too, when your spirit has taken its fill of food and wine there,
may tell me what land is your own and what troubles you have suffered.”
So he spoke, and the noble swineherd led him on to the shelter,
brought him within and sat him down, and he heaped up thick brushwood,
and over it spread the hide of a shaggy and wild mountain goat there,
where he himself used to sleep, large and furry; and glad was Odysseus
that he received him thus, and he spoke and addressed him by saying:
“May Zeus grant to you, stranger, and all the other immortals,
that thing which above all else you desire, since you welcomed me kindly.”
Then in answer to him you spoke, Eumaeus the swineherd:
“Stranger, it is not right for me, not even if one still poorer
came here than you, to dishonor a guest; for from Zeus are all strangers
and all beggars; and a gift, though little, is precious and welcome,
such as comes from us, for this is the portion of bondmen forever,
living in fear when the masters who hold all the power above them
are but young men. For the gods have indeed tied up his homecoming,
his, who would have loved me warmly and granted possessions unto me,
house and a portion of land and a wife much courted by many,
such things as a kindly master gives to his household dependent,
one who has labored much for him, and a god gives increase upon it,
just as increase is given to this work of mine, where I stay here.
In return my master would greatly have prospered and honored me, had he
grown old here; but he is dead. Would that Helen's whole breed had perished,
sunk to destruction before, since she loosed the knees of so many;
for he too went forth for the sake of the honor of Agamemnon,
went to horse-breeding Ilium there, to battle against the Trojans.”
So he spoke, and swiftly he tightened his tunic close with a girdle,
then he went to the sties where the gathered litters of piglets were penned there.
From there he took out two and brought them, and slaughtered them both there,
singed them and cut them in pieces and spitted them over the firewood.
Then when he had roasted all, he brought it and set it by him there,
hot on the spits themselves, and over it sprinkled white barley;
and in an ivywood cup he mixed the wine that was honey-sweet for him;
then he sat down across from his guest, and urged him onward, saying:
“Eat now, stranger, what is set before household servants for portion:
Pork then; yet fatted swine the suitors are eating in plenty,
keeping no thought in their hearts for the gods’ overseeing or pity.
Truly the blessed gods do not love deeds that are ruthless and lawless,
but they honor justice and honor the rightful works of men.
Even men that are hostile and savage, raiders on foray,
living upon foreign land when Zeus grants booty unto them,
once they have filled up their ships they depart for returning homeward,
even on them there falls in the heart a strong fear of requital.
But these men also know something; they heard some voice of a god there,
telling of his grim ruin; therefore they are not willing in justice
either to woo or go back to the homes that belong to them, rather
here at their ease they consume his possessions with arrogant wastefulness.
For as many as nights are and days that come down from great Zeus’ hand,
never once do they slaughter one victim alone, nor only two ones;
wine as well they keep draining in insolence, drawing it freely.
For indeed his livelihood once was beyond all measure and telling;
no man here among heroes possessed so much, not on the dark mainland,
nor in Ithaca self; no, not twenty men together
have such wealth in their hands; and I now will recount it before you.
Twelve are the herds on the mainland, and just so many sheep-flocks,
just so many swine-droves, and so many broad-pastured goat-herds,
fed by hired strangers and also by herdsmen that are his own people.
Here meanwhile at the farthest edge are eleven goat-herds in all,
broad-ranging, grazing, and over them stand excellent keepers.
Each one of these men, every day, drives a beast to the suitors,
whichever of all the rich-fattened goats may appear to be finest.
But as for me, I keep these swine and guard them from destruction,
and I choose out the best of the pigs and send it before them.”
So he spoke, and the other kept eating the meat and the wine there
eagerly, saying no word, but in heart sowing doom for the suitors.
But when he had supped and had satisfied fully his spirit with victuals,
then the man filled up for him the cup from which he himself drank,
filled it with wine to the brim, and he gave it; the guest took it gladly,
and rejoicing at heart he addressed him with winged words, saying:
“Dear friend, who was the man that purchased you with his possessions,
being so wealthy indeed and so strong, as you tell in your speaking?
Yet you say that he perished because of Agamemnon’s honor.
Tell me his name, in case I may know such a man if I meet him.
Zeus perhaps knows this thing, and the other immortal gods also,
whether by seeing I might report him; for far have I wandered.”
Then in answer the swineherd replied, that commander of people:
“Old sir, no man that came here wandering, bringing news of that master,
ever would persuade his wife or the son that he cherished dearly.
Rather, men wanting support, mere vagabonds roaming about here,
utter lies at random and do not wish to tell what is truthful.
Whoever comes wandering into the people and land of Ithaca,
going then to my mistress, talks over deceits and inventions.
She gives welcome kindly and loves him and asks him each matter,
and from her eyelids tears drop down as she mourns while she listens,
as is the way of a wife whenever her husband has perished afar off.
You as well, old father, would quickly have fashioned a story,
if some man were to give you a mantle and tunic for clothing.
But by now his skin from his bones have the dogs and the swift birds torn off,
and the life-breath has left him; or fishes have eaten him in the sea-depth,
and his bones on the mainland are lying somewhere on the seashore,
covered around and concealed in a multitude deep of the sand there.
Thus he has perished away from us there, and behind him has left grief
unto all of his friends, and to me most of all beyond others;
never again shall I find so gentle a lord, wherever I travel,
not even if I should come once more to the house of my father and mother,
there where first I was born and they themselves reared and sustained me.
Yet not even for them do I grieve with a sorrow so heavy, although I
long with my eyes to behold them again in the land of my fathers.
No, but longing for gone Odysseus consumes me and takes me.
Him, my friend, though absent, I am ashamed even now to name loudly,
since exceedingly he loved me and cared for me deep in his spirit.
Still I call him my dear one, although he is far off and absent.”
Then to him again spoke resourceful divine Odysseus:
“Friend, since you utterly now deny, and no longer are saying
that he will come, but always your heart is set fast in mistrusting,
therefore I shall not speak merely so, but swear you an oath on it:
home will come Odysseus; and let there be good-news reward for me
instantly, once in his going he reaches his own halls in safety:
clothe me then in a mantle and tunic, fair garments to wear there.
But before that time, though I am in need beyond measure, I take nothing.
For as hateful to me as the gates of Hades is that man
who, yielding to poverty, speaks out deceit and false stories.
Let Zeus witness now first among gods, and the hospitable table,
and the hearth of noble Odysseus, to which I have come as a suppliant:
surely all these things will be brought to pass as I tell you.
Within this very round of the year Odysseus will come here.
As this month wanes away, and the next one rises upon us,
home he will make his return, and he will punish whoever
here in this place dishonors his wife and his glorious young son.”
Then in reply you answered him, Eumaeus the swineherd:
“Old man, I for one will not pay for this good news you bring me,
nor will Odysseus come ever again to his household.
Drink now in peace, and let us remember some different matter;
do not remind me of these things. My heart in my breast here
aches whenever a man calls back my noble lord to my mind.
But come, let us leave aside this oath; and yet may Odysseus
come as I wish in my heart, and as Penelope wishes,
and old man Laertes, and godlike Telemachus also.
Now it is rather the boy that I mourn with grief unforgetting,
Telemachus, whom Odysseus begot. The gods reared him splendid,
like a young shoot, and I thought he would be among all men
in no way less than his own dear father, wondrous in stature
and in beauty; but someone, immortal or mortal, has harmed him,
struck his mind within; and he went for word of his father
on to holy Pylos. But the lordly suitors are waiting
there for his journeying home, so that utterly perishes nameless
out of Ithaca the line of godlike Arceisius.
But let us leave him now, whether he may be taken or flee them,
whether the son of Cronos may stretch out his hand there above him.
But come, old sir, tell me now of your own grief and affliction,
and tell me this truthfully too, so that I may know it clearly:
who are you among men, and from where? Where is your city?
Where are your parents? On what kind of ship did you come here?
How did the sailors convey you to Ithaca? Who were they saying
they were? For I do not suppose you arrived here on footpath.”
Then resourceful Odysseus made answer and spoke in reply to him:
“Therefore I shall tell all these things to you with precision.
If there were food for us two for a long while before us,
and sweet wine in the hut while we sat here within it,
feasting in quiet, while others attended their work and their labor,
easily then for a whole turning year without ceasing
could I speak and still not accomplish the tale of my spirit's
griefs, all the toils I endured by the ordinance given from heaven.
I declare that my lineage springs from broad Crete's people:
I am the son of a rich man; and many sons in addition
grew up and were born in his halls, true sons by his wedded wife there.
Me a purchased mother bore, a concubine in his household.
Yet Castor son of Hylax, whose stock I declare that I come from,
honored me equally there with the children born in the household.
He in his time was honored among the Cretans like a god was,
for his prosperity, wealth, and the glory of sons in abundance.
But indeed death-dooms came on him and bore him away to the dwelling
down in the house of Hades; then his proud sons divided
all of the livelihood up, and they cast lots over the portions.
But to me they gave very little, and marked out a house-lot.
Yet I took for my wife a woman from men of great holdings,
won for my own valor, since I was no weak and vain fellow,
nor one who hangs back from war. But now all that has left me.
Still, I think, by the stubble that stands you may judge of the grainfield.
For a great ruinous trouble beyond all measure has gripped me.
Truly Ares gave me boldness, and Pallas Athena,
and man-shattering force, whenever I chose for an ambush
pick of my men, while planting evils for hostile fighters.
Never once did my proud heart forebode death in its counsels,
but much the first I would leap forth and strike with the spear-point
any foe among enemy men who gave way to my foot-rush.
Such was I in war. But the work of the field never pleased me,
nor house-management, which is what nourishes glorious children.
No, but to me there were always dear the oar-driven vessels,
and wars, and well-polished spears, and the flight of arrows,
grim things indeed, which make other mortals shudder and tremble.
But these things were dear to me, such as a god placed within me.
For one man finds delight in one kind of labor, another in others.
For before ever the sons of Achaea embarked against Troy-town,
nine times over I led both men and swift-faring vessels
out against foreign men, and much came into my keeping.
From the spoil I would choose what my heart desired, and much afterward
used to fall to me by lot; so quickly my household increased then,
and thereafter among the Cretans I grew to be feared and respected.
But when at last Zeus of the wide-seeing counsel devised there
that hateful road which loosened the knees of so many mortals,
then they commanded that I and glorious Idomeneus
should lead the ships unto Ilios. There was no contriving
any refusal; the people's harsh rumor was heavy upon us.
There for nine years we sons of Achaea made war all together,
In the tenth year we sacked the city of Priam and started
homeward with our ships, but a god dispersed the Achaeans.
Yet against pitiful me Zeus the deep-counseling plotted evils.
One month only I stayed, taking joy in my children,
in my lawful wife and my wealth; but after that time then
my own spirit urged me to voyage seaward to Egypt,
after I fitted my ships with my comrades like gods beside me.
Nine ships I fitted out, and swiftly the people assembled.
Then for six days in order my trusty companions kept feasting,
while I myself provided abundant beasts for the offerings,
both to sacrifice to the gods and to furnish their banquet.
But on the seventh day, when we had embarked from broad Crete's island,
we sailed on under Boreas, fresh and fair for our sailing,
easily, as though with the stream; and not one ship among them
came to any harm, but uninjured all and untroubled
there we sat, while the wind and the helmsmen guided them onward.
On the fifth day then we came to the fair-flowing Nile of Egypt,
and there in the river of Egypt I moored my curving ships there.
There indeed I commanded my trusty companions
there by the ships to remain and to guard the seafaring vessels,
and I sent out lookouts to go to the posts of observance.
But they gave way to their pride, yielding, following their own force,
and at once they ravaged the splendid fields of the Egyptians,
carried away their women and little innocent children,
and killed the men; and quickly the outcry reached to the city.
Hearing the shouting, as soon as the dawn was beginning to show there,
they came, and the whole plain filled full of footmen and horsemen,
and with the flash of bronze; and Zeus who delights in the thunder
cast ruinous panic on my companions, and no man among them
dared to stand and face them, for doom closed round us on all sides.
There they killed many men of us with the sharp bronze weapon,
others they led away living, compelled to work as their bondmen.
But for me Zeus himself put this design in my spirit—
would that I there had died and had met with my destiny in Egypt,
since there was still more sorrow waiting there to receive me—
straightway I lifted the well-wrought helmet down from my head then,
and the shield from my shoulders, and cast the spear from my hand there.
Then I went to the king where he stood by the front of his chariot,
clasped his knees and kissed them; and he protected and pitied me,
set me into his car and carried me home while I wept there.
Truly then many men kept rushing against me with ashwood spears,
eager to kill me, for they were enraged beyond all measure;
but he held them back, for he feared the anger of Zeus the protector
of strangers, who most of all is indignant at evil actions.
There for seven full years I remained in that land, and I gathered
much wealth among Egyptian men, for all of them gave me gifts there.
But when the eighth returning year had come upon me,
then there came a Phoenician man well versed in deceits there,
a cheat, a man-devouring rogue, who had wrought many evils.
He beguiled me with craft in his heart, so that we came together
into Phoenicia, the place where his house and possessions were lying.
There I remained beside him through the full course of a year there.
But when the months and the days were now being completed,
as the year wheeled round again and the seasons came onward,
then on a seafaring ship he put me aboard bound for Libya,
plotting his lies, so that I might help him convey his cargo,
and that there he might sell me and take an uncountable ransom.
I followed with him on the ship, though suspecting it, under compulsion.
On she ran with Boreas, fresh and fair for the voyaging onward,
over the midst of the sea past Crete; but Zeus planned their destruction.
But when we had left behind us Crete, and no other country
anywhere could be seen, but only the sky and the seaways,
then the son of Cronos set a dark cloud over the vessel,
over the hollow ship, and the sea grew dark beneath it.
Zeus at the same time thundered and cast his bolt at the vessel;
all of the ship reeled round when struck by the bolt of the thunder-god,
and it filled with sulfurous smoke; and all men fell from the vessel.
Like to the sea-crows they drifted around the black ship there,
borne on the waves; and the god took away their day of returning.
But to me Zeus himself, though I had pain in the heart there,
placed in my hands the immense tall mast of the dark-prowed vessel,
so that I still might somehow escape from the evil before me.
Round it I wound myself fast and was borne by the baneful stormwinds.
Nine days I was borne, and on the tenth in the blackness of night then
a great rolling wave drove me near to the land of the Thesprotians.
There did Pheidon the hero, the king of the Thesprotians, save me,
asking no price; for his own dear son had encountered and found me,
broken by cold clear air and by weariness, led me homeward,
raising me up by the hand until we came to his father's palace,
and he put clothing around me, a cloak and a tunic upon me.
There I heard news of Odysseus; for he indeed was saying
he had received him as guest and had loved him, bound for his homeland,
and he showed me the treasures, all that Odysseus had gathered,
bronze and gold in abundance, and iron laboriously fashioned.
Even to a tenth generation one more man might still live on it;
such were the stores of the lord that lay in the halls of the master.
And he said he had gone to Dodona, that there he might listen
there from the high-leaved oak to the counsel of Zeus our father,
how he might journey back to the rich-furrowed people of Ithaca,
whether returning at last openly, or else in secret.
He swore it himself in my presence, and poured out drink in his palace,
that a ship had been hauled down and companions stood all in readiness,
men who would send him away to his own dear fatherland safely.
But he dispatched me first, for it chanced that there was a vessel
of Thesprotian men on the way to wheat-rich land of Dulichium.
He urged them to send me with care to the king, to Acastus;
but for those men an evil design was pleasing within them
touching my fate, so that pain might become my full portion thereafter.
But when far from the land the seafaring ship had departed,
straightway they plotted for me the day of slavery and bondage.
Off of me then they stripped both cloak and tunic, the garments I carried,
and around me they cast some other wretched rag and a tunic,
tattered and torn, the same that you can behold with your own eyes;
and by evening they came to the fields of clear-seen Ithaca.
There they bound me fast in the well-benched ship where I sat there,
tightly with twisted cord, while they themselves, disembarking,
hastened along by the beach of the sea to take their evening meal.
But the gods themselves unwound and loosened the bond that was on me
very easily; and then round my head I drew my foul rag closely,
and by the smooth steering-plank I slipped down and entered the seawater,
breast first, then with both of my hands I pulled through the water,
swimming, and very soon I left them all far in the distance.
Then I climbed where there stood the dense growth of a many-flowered thicket,
and I lay there crouched; and they went about with loud lamentation.
Yet it did not appear to their minds more profitable, further,
to search any more; so back once again they made for the vessel,
back to the hollow ship; but the gods themselves hid and concealed me
very easily, and guided me on to the steading and sheepfold
of a man who had knowledge; for still it is fated I live on.”
Then in answer you spoke, Eumaeus, swineherd and good man:
“Ah poor stranger, unlucky indeed, you have greatly disturbed me,
telling each thing in order, the sufferings and wanderings you have borne through.
Yet in good order one point is not, and you never will win me,
speaking of great Odysseus; and why should one such as you are
lie to no purpose at all? I know very well in my own heart
of my master's return, how hated he was by all the immortals,
utterly, since they did not let him be killed among Trojans,
or in the arms of his friends, when at last he had wound up the war-web.
Then the Panachaeans would have made him a burial mound there,
and for his son thereafter he would have won mighty glory.
But now ingloriously Harpies have swept him away and have taken him.
As for me, I stay here apart among swine; and I do not go cityward,
unless circumspect Penelope somewhere should urge and command me
to come, whenever tidings have come in from somewhere or other.
Then they all sit around and ask the man questions on all things,
both those who grieve for the lord who has long been absent and vanished,
and those who rejoice while they eat up his substance without paying.
But for me it is not dear at all to inquire and ask further
after the time when an Aetolian man deceived me with story,
one who had killed a man and had wandered over much country,
and he came to my dwelling; and I embraced him and loved him fully.
He declared he had seen him in Crete, beside Idomeneus’ household,
mending his ships, which storms and tempests had shattered and broken;
and he said he would come either in summer or else in the autumn,
bringing abundant possessions, with comrades like gods in attendance.
And you, old man of many griefs, since a god has now brought you before me,
do not seek my good will by falsehoods, and do not enchant me;
for it is not for this that I shall respect you or love you,
but from fear of Zeus, god of strangers, and pity for your condition.”
Then in answer to him spoke Odysseus, resourceful and steadfast:
“Surely there is in your breast a heart that is wholly untrusting,
seeing that not even swearing an oath can persuade you or move you.
But come now, let us establish between us a binding agreement;
and hereafter let gods who possess Olympus bear witness between us.
If indeed your master comes back to this house as I tell you,
clothe me in cloak and in tunic, in garments, and send me in safety
off to Dulichium, there where my own dear heart has desired to go to;
but if your master does not come home, as I now am declaring,
then urge on your serving-men to take me and throw me headlong
down from a great sheer rock, so another poor man may shrink from deception.”
Then in reply the noble swineherd spoke and addressed him:
“Stranger, that surely would win me fair glory and noble repute there
both among men of the present and men of the ages hereafter,
if, when I brought you into my hut and had given you guest-gifts,
then I should kill you again and take your dear life-breath from you.
Then with a willing heart I could pray to Zeus son of Cronos.
But now it is time for supper; and quickly my comrades within here
ought to be, so in the hut we may make us a hearty meal ready.”
Thus then the two of them spoke such words to one another there.
And now the swine and the men who were herding them came up near them.
Then indeed they penned up the sows in their places for sleeping,
and an unspeakable din of the pigs arose in the fold-yard.
Then to his own companions the noble swineherd called out:
“Bring the best of the hogs, so that I may sacrifice for
this guest from far away; and we also shall profit thereby, we
who for long have endured and suffered distress for these white-tusks,
while other men eat up our toil and pay us no payment.”
So then he spoke, and with pitiless bronze he was splitting the kindling.
They then brought in a hog, very fat, of five years of age there.
Him they next set beside the hearth; and the swineherd did not then
fail to remember the deathless gods, for his thoughts had true goodness.
But beginning the rite, he cast in the fire the head-bristles
from the white-tusked boar, and he prayed to the company of gods
that wise Odysseus might come again home to his own house.
Then, lifting a billet of oak that was left from the chopping,
he struck, and the life left the boar; and the rest slit the throat there.
Quickly they singed him and cut him apart; and the swineherd then made ready
firstlings from every limb of the flesh, laying them in fat richness,
and these he cast in the fire, sprinkling them over with barley.
The rest they carved into pieces and ran them through spits for roasting,
roasted them carefully through, and when all was done drew them off there,
and they laid them all in the trenchers together. The swineherd
stood there dividing the feast, for his mind knew fitting measure.
Then he cut and allotted the whole into seven portions.
One of these, with a prayer, he set for the Nymphs and for Hermes,
Maia’s son; and the other six he divided to each one.
But Odysseus he honored with chine unbroken and lengthy
from the white-tusked hog, and he gladdened the heart of his master.
Then resourceful Odysseus spoke and addressed him directly:
“Would that, Eumaeus, you might be dear to father Zeus truly
even as you are dear to me, since you honor me, though I am wretched.”
Then in reply you answered him, Eumaeus the swineherd:
“Eat, my uncanny guest, and delight yourself in what is here for us.
One thing a god gives, another he leaves; it is as he chooses,
whatever may please his own heart, for indeed he can do all things.”
So he spoke, and he burned the first cuts for the gods everlasting;
then he poured out the flaming wine and set it in the hands there
of Odysseus, sacker of cities; then sat by his portion.
And Mesaulios served them the bread, whom the swineherd had purchased
for himself all alone while his lord had been gone and far absent,
apart from his mistress and old Laertes not knowing of it.
Him from the Taphian men he had bought with possessions of his own.
Then to the good fare lying before them they stretched out their hands there.
But when they had put from themselves the desire for drinking and eating,
then Mesaulios took away the bread, and the others toward sleeping,
filled full with bread and with meat, were turning and moving to bed there.
Then there came on a moonless and evil night, and Zeus sent rain down
all through the night, while the mighty wet West Wind blew unceasing.
Then Odysseus spoke among them, testing the swineherd’s spirit,
whether perhaps he would take off his cloak and bestow it upon him,
or else urge one of his comrades to give it, since he cared for him deeply:
“Listen to me now, Eumaeus, and all you companions besides here;
boasting, I think, I will utter a word; for the wine gives commandment,
maddening stuff, which compels even one who is prudent to sing out,
makes him laugh softly, and rouses him up to dance in his gladness,
and sends forth many a word that were better to leave still unspoken.
But since I have shouted it out at the first, I will hide nothing.
Would that I still were young, and my strength still stood firm within me,
as when beneath Troy we prepared and led forth an ambush.
There Odysseus was leader, and Atreus’ son Menelaus;
with them I was commander as third, for they themselves asked it.
But when at last we had come by the city and steep wall of Ilion,
there in the thick underbrush all around and outside the city,
among reeds and marsh-grass, crouched low underneath our armor,
we lay; and there came on us an evil night with the North Wind,
freezing; and over us snow was falling like hoarfrost in whiteness,
cold, and around on the shields the rime and the ice-crust were forming.
There all the others had cloaks and tunics to cover them warmly,
and at their ease they slept with their shoulders wrapped under their shields there.
But I, fool, had left my cloak behind with my comrades departing.
in my own foolishness, since I had not thought I would shiver;
no, I had followed with only my shield and my glittering war-belt.
But when the night was divided in thirds, and the stars had gone onward,
then I spoke to Odysseus, who lay there close beside me,
nudging him there with my elbow; and quickly he listened and heard me:
“Seed of Zeus, son of Laertes, Odysseus of many devices,
I will not any longer remain with the living; this storm-cold
masters me, since I have no cloak; some god has deceived me
into being in one tunic only; now there is no escape left.”
So I spoke, and at once in his heart he conceived this design there,
such as that man was in planning as well as in standing to battle;
and then speaking low, from behind me, he said me this counsel:
“Silence now, lest some other Achaean happen to hear you.”
So he spoke, and upon his elbow he rested his head, then he told them:
“Hear me, my friends; in my sleep there came me a god-given dream-vision.
Far indeed from the ships have we come; but let one man be ready
to tell Agamemnon, the son of Atreus, shepherd of peoples,
that he should urge more men from beside the ships to come toward us.”
So he spoke, and then Thoas arose, Andraemon’s son, in his swiftness,
springing up, and he laid down his cloak of the deep purple color,
and ran on his way to the ships; and I in that man’s cloak there
lay there gladly at rest, till Dawn on her golden throne shone.
If only now I were young, and my strength were abiding within me,
then would one of the swineherds here in the folds give a cloak to me,
both for kindness and out of respect for the worth of the wearer;
now they dishonor me, since I have evil clothing upon me.”
Then in reply you answered him, Eumaeus the swineherd:
“Old man, the tale that you have recounted is wholly blameless;
not one word have you spoken beyond what is fitting and useful.
Therefore you shall not lack for clothing, nor anything else of
all that befits a much-suffering suppliant once one has met him,
now; but at daybreak again you will shake your own rags on your shoulders.
For there are not many cloaks here, nor spare tunics for changing,
here to be worn; there is only one garment for each man among us.
Yet whenever the dear son of great Odysseus comes to us,
he himself will give you a cloak and a tunic to wear here,
and he will send you wherever your heart and your spirit command you.”
So saying, he sprang to his feet, and set him a bed by the firelight,
and upon it he threw down the fleeces of sheep and of she-goats.
There Odysseus lay down, and over him then he cast a cloak on,
thick and large, which he kept there beside him, a change for his wearing,
to put on whenever a monstrous storm of the winter should rise up.
So then Odysseus slept there, and beside him the young men
slept as well. But the swineherd was not at all pleased by the bedding
there in that place, to be sleeping away from the swine that he guarded;
rather he went outside and made ready his armor; Odysseus
was glad that away though he was, the man cared still for his substance.
First of all he slung his sharp sword around his stout shoulders,
then around him he put a dense cloak to beat back the wind-blasts,
and he took up the skin of a goat that was large and well-fattened,
and he took up a sharp-pointed spear, for defense against dogs and men too.
Then he went to lie down where the white-tusked swine were accustomed,
sleeping under a hollowed rock, in the lee of the North Wind.
