The Odyssey — Book XXII

The slaughter in the hall.

Then resourceful Odysseus stripped off the rags from his body,
sprang to the great high threshold, with bow in hand and the quiver
full of arrows, and poured the swift shafts out there in a cluster
down at his feet, and then among all the suitors he told them:
“Here is a trial accomplished, a feat beyond all contending.
Now I shall aim at another mark, that no mortal has hit yet,
if I can strike it, if Apollo grants me the glory.”
So he spoke, and he sighted the bitter shaft straight at Antinous.
He was just then on the point of lifting a beautiful goblet,
golden, with handles on both sides, and turning it there in his fingers
so he might drink of the wine; but slaughter was not in his spirit.
Who among men at a feast would ever have thought that a single
man in the midst of so many, even though he were mighty,
would bring upon him evil death and the black doom with it?
But Odysseus, taking full aim at his throat, shot the arrow,
and clean through the tender neck went the point of the weapon.
Sideways he toppled, and down from his hand fell the cup when it struck him;
straight from his nostrils a thick jet rose up of dark blood,
blood of a man, and quickly he kicked the table away from him,
thrusting it off with his foot, and all the provisions spilled earthward.
Bread and the roasted meats were befouled. Then all the suitors
raised a great uproar through the hall when they saw the man fallen.
Up from their chairs they sprang in confusion about the chamber,
glancing around in all directions toward the well-fashioned walling.
Nowhere at hand was a shield, nowhere a stout spear to snatch up.
Then they reviled Odysseus in furious words and in anger:
“Stranger, you shoot at men to your ruin. No longer will any
other contests confront you. Now your steep death is upon you.
For indeed now you have killed the man who was far the noblest
youth among all in Ithaca. Vultures here will devour you.”
So each man imagined, since they supposed he had not meant murder,
meaning to kill the man by no design. But the fools did not see this,
that for them all alike the cords of destruction were fastened.
Then with a lowering gaze spoke out resourceful Odysseus:
“Dogs, you never expected that I should come home here again from
Troy and the land of her people, and so you laid waste to my household;
with my serving women you forced yourselves down into bed there,
and while I yet lived you sought to win my wife for your own use,
having no fear of the gods who possess the broad heaven above us,
nor of any revenge from mankind that would come upon you later.
Now for you all alike the cords of destruction are fastened.”
So he spoke, and pale fear seized hold of them, every one of them.
Each man peered all around for some way to flee steep destruction.
Then Eurymachus alone made answer and spoke in reply to him:
“If indeed you are truly Odysseus, the Ithacan, home now,
then what you have spoken is just, for the Achaeans have done these
many reckless things in your halls, and many also in the farmland.
But now here lies the man who was cause of the whole thing,
Antinous. He it was who urged on these actions among us,
not that he needed this marriage so much, nor greatly desired it,
but with another design, which the son of Cronos denied him:
that he himself might reign in the land of well-builded Ithaca,
and in ambush kill your son and so make himself master.
Now he lies in his fate. But spare your people, I beg you;
we in the land hereafter will make due amends before all men
for whatever was drunk and devoured in your halls by the suitors.
Each of us bringing a price of twenty oxen in payment,
bronze and gold shall repay you, until at last your heart softens.
Till then, no man could censure your anger and say it was blameful.”
Then with a lowering gaze spoke out resourceful Odysseus:
“Eurymachus, not if you gave me all your ancestral possessions,
all that is yours at present, and added more from elsewhere,
not even so would I hold back these hands of mine from the slaughter
till the suitors have paid for the whole of their arrogant outrage.
Now there lies before you the choice, either stand up and fight me,
or flee, if any man thinks to escape his death and destruction.
Yet I do not suppose one man of you will escape steep destruction.”
So he spoke, and the knees of the others were loosed, and their heartstrings.
Then Eurymachus spoke out among them a second time, calling:
“Friends, this man will not hold back those invincible hands now,
since he has taken the polished bow and the quiver beside him.
From the smooth threshold there he will keep on shooting until he
kills us all. So let us remember the work of battle.
Draw out your swords, and hold up the tables against the arrows,
arrows of sudden death, and let us all rush upon him
packed together, if so we may push him away from the threshold,
drive him out from the doors, and go through the town, and the alarm cry
will rise at once. Then that man would have shot his last arrow.”
So he spoke, and he drew his sharp sword out of the sheath there,
bronze and keen on both edges, and sprang straight forward against him
with a blood-freezing yell; but noble Odysseus did not miss him,
loosed the shaft and struck him there in the chest by the nipple,
and planted the swift-flying arrow deep fast in his liver;
from his hand the broadsword fell to the floor, and over the table
down he collapsed in a heap, and spilled to the earth all the viands
and the two-handled cup; and he battered the ground with his forehead,
writhing in anguish of heart, and with both of his feet he kept kicking,
shaking the chair; and darkness was poured all over his eyesight.
Then Amphinomus rushed at renowned Odysseus in fury,
charging headlong against him, and drew his keen-edged sword there,
hoping somehow to force him away from the doors; but before him
Telemachus struck from behind with a bronze-shod spear in his onset,
square in the midst of the shoulders, and drove it on through his chest-bone;
thundering he fell, and he smote on the ground with his full brow.
Then Telemachus sprang back, leaving the long-shadowing lance there
fixed in Amphinomus; for he feared lest one of the Achaeans,
while he was tugging out the long-shadowing spear, might attack him
rushing with sword, or might strike him down as he bent forward.
Then he ran, and very swiftly came to the side of his father,
and standing close beside him spoke out winged words in address there:
“Father, now I will bring you a shield and a pair of spears here,
and a helmet of solid bronze, fitted close over the temples;
I myself too will put armor on as I go, and I will give some
also to swineherd and cowherd; for to be armed is far better.”
Then resourceful Odysseus in answer addressed him and said this:
“Bring them at a run, while arrows are still here for my defense yet,
lest they should drive me away from the doors, when I stand here alone.”
So he spoke, and Telemachus obeyed his beloved father,
and went on his way to the chamber where glorious armor was lying.
From there he took four shields, and eight spears together,
and four bronze helmets thick-crested with horsehair upon them;
then he came back bearing them, and quickly reached his dear father.
First of all he clad his own body about with the bronze there;
and in the same way the two serving men put on the fair armor,
and stood on both sides of Odysseus, master of battle and counsel.
Now he, so long as the shafts for defense were still there beside him,
kept on striking one suitor after another within his own house,
aiming unerringly; and they fell one by one at close quarters.
But when the arrows deserted the lord as he shot from the bowstring,
then he leaned the bow by a pillar of the well-builded hall there,
setting it upright against the bright-faced wall by the entry,
and around his shoulders he slung a shield made of four hides,
and upon his mighty head he set a well-fashioned helmet,
horse-haired, and the crest above it nodded terribly over him;
then he grasped in his hands two stout spears tipped over with bronze.
There was a side-door set in the wall of the well-builded chamber,
and a way by the top of the threshold out of the strong hall
led to a passage; and well-fitted planks were fastened upon it.
Noble Odysseus commanded the godlike swineherd to guard it,
standing close by the place; for that was the one sole outlet.
Then Agelaus spoke among them, declaring his thought to them all there:
“Friends, could not one of you climb through the side-door upward
and give word to the people, so the cry might arise all the quicker?
Then at once this man would shoot now for the last time with the bowstring.”
Then Melanthius the goatherd addressed him again and answered:
“No, Agelaus, cherished by Zeus, there is no way to do this;
for too terribly near are the fair doors leading into the courtyard,
and the mouth of the passage is hard; one man might hold back all of us,
if he were strong. But come now, I will bring you armor to harness on
out of the chamber; for there, I am thinking, and nowhere else have
arms been stored by Odysseus and by his illustrious son here.”
So saying, Melanthius the goatherd climbed up through the hall there,
making his way by the smoke-vents into Odysseus' storerooms.
From there he took out twelve shields, and as many spears with them,
and as many bronze helmets thick-crested with horsehair upon them;
then he went on his way, and swiftly brought them and gave them to suitors.
Then indeed the knees of Odysseus were loosened beneath him,
and his dear heart, when he saw them all putting the armor about them
and shaking in hand their long spears; and mighty the task seemed before him.
Quickly then he addressed Telemachus, speaking winged words to him:
“Telemachus, surely one of the women here in these chambers
stirs up this evil war against us, or else it is Melanthius.”
Then prudent Telemachus answered him back in reply and said this:
“Father, I myself am the one who blundered in this, and no other
bears the blame, for I left the close-fitted door of the chamber
standing ajar; and their watcher was sharper of eye than I was.
But go now, noble Eumaeus, and fasten the door of the chamber,
and find out whether it is one of the women who does these things,
or Melanthius, son of Dolius; for that is the man whom I suspect.”
So they were speaking such words to each other there in the great hall.
Back to the storeroom Melanthius went, the goatherd of the homestead,
meaning to fetch fine armor; but the noble swineherd observed him,
and at once he spoke to Odysseus, standing there very near him:
“Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus of many devices,
there goes again that secretive man whom we both had suspected;
into the storeroom he goes; so now tell me truly and clearly,
shall I kill him, if indeed I prove to be stronger than he is,
or shall I bring him here to you, so he may repay all transgressions,
many and vile, that this man has plotted within your own household?”
Then resourceful Odysseus in answer addressed him and told him:
“I and Telemachus here will restrain the proud suitors within doors,
even though in their fury they long with all might for the fighting.
You two, twisting around both his feet and his hands from behind him,
cast him into the chamber, and fasten the planks at his backside;
then let a braided rope be made fast there firmly upon him,
haul him up the tall pillar and draw him close to the roofbeams,
so that alive for long he may suffer afflictions and anguish.”
So he spoke, and the two of them listened with care and obeyed him;
off to the chamber they went, and the man there inside did not see them.
There in the innermost part of the chamber he searched among armor,
while the two took their stand on each side by the doorposts and waited.
But when over the threshold stepped Melanthius, goatherd and traitor,
in the one hand bearing a well-made helmet of beauty and brightness,
and in the other a broad old shield, all stained by the mildew,
once of the hero Laertes, which he in his young days had carried;
now it had long lain unused, and the seams of its straps were all loosened.
Then with a rush the two men seized him and dragged him back inward
by the hair, and cast him down on the floor, though his heart was in anguish,
and they bound together his feet and his hands with a painful binding,
wrenching them hard behind him and throughly, just as he was ordered
by the son of Laertes, enduring Odysseus the noble.
Then to him they made fast a braided rope in its plaiting,
hauled him up the tall pillar and drew him close to the roofbeams.
Then in mockery you spoke to him, Eumaeus the swineherd:
“Now beyond all doubt, Melanthius, you will keep watch through the nightlong,
lying at ease on a soft bed, as indeed is fit and becoming;
nor will Dawn, early-born by the streams of the Ocean, escape you
when she comes on her golden throne, at the hour when you drive in
goats for the suitors throughout the house, to prepare them a banquet.”
So there he was left in that place, stretched tight in the deadly binding;
and the two men put on their armor, then shut the bright door of the chamber,
and went back to Odysseus, shrewd in war and in woven devices.
There with fury breathing they stood; on the threshold were four men,
while there were many besides within the hall, and all were good fighters.
Then came near to them Athena, the daughter of Zeus in her power,
taking the shape of Mentor in stature as well as in speaking.
Odysseus rejoiced when he saw her, and spoke out and addressed her:
“Mentor, ward off destruction, and think on your dear old companion,
who would do good by you always; and you are my agemate in seasons.”
So he spoke, for he thought it was Pallas Athena who rouses the battle.
But the suitors from their side raised a shout through the hall all together,
and the first one to chide her was Agelaus, son of Damastor:
“Mentor, do not let Odysseus persuade you with words and cajolings
to do battle with suitors and stand in defense of his person.
For I think that our purpose in this way surely will be accomplished:
when we have killed these two, both the father and son, in the hall here,
then you also among them will perish for all that you purpose
to do in the palace; and you will repay with your own head the payment.
But when by bronze we have stripped the strength from the limbs of you all here,
all your possessions, whatever you have, both within and without doors,
we will mingle with those of Odysseus; and never your children,
not your sons, shall be left alive in the halls of your household,
nor your daughters, nor your wise-hearted wife walk Ithaca’s city.”
So he spoke, and Athena in the deep heart grew angrier still then,
and she rebuked Odysseus and scolded with wrathful expressions:
“Odysseus, no longer in you does steadfast fury remain now,
nor any valor like that when, for Helen the white-armed and noble,
nine long years without cease you fought with the Trojans in battle,
and in the grim encounter of war you slew many fighters;
and by your counsel the broad-wayed city of Priam was taken.
How is it now, when you have come home to your house and possessions,
that face to face with the suitors you wail to be thought a brave fighter?
Come now here, my dear friend, stand by me and look on this action,
so that you may know what sort of a man, among hostile opponents,
Mentor the son of Alcimus is in repaying a kindness.”
So she spoke, but as yet she did not bestow full victory on either,
but went on testing the strength and the fighting spirit and endurance
both of Odysseus himself and the glorious son at his side there.
Then she herself to the smoke-dark roof of the hall darted upward,
and there she perched overhead, in the likeness and look of a swallow.
Then Agelaus, the son of Damastor, roused up the suitors,
Eurynomus with him, Amphimedon, and Demoptolemus,
Peisander son of Polyctor, and battle-wise Polybus also;
for in the suitors' strength these men stood out as the bravest,
all who were still alive and were fighting around for their life-breath;
all the others already the bow and the thick-falling arrows had mastered.
Then Agelaus addressed them, declaring his word to them all there:
“Friends, now at last this man will have his irresistible hands checked;
yes, and Mentor has gone, after speaking his empty assurances,
and they are left there alone by the first of the doorway's panels.
Therefore do not all of you cast your long spears together;
no, come, let six men first let fly, if perhaps Zeus may grant it
that Odysseus be struck and that glory be won for ourselves here.
For the rest are no care, once this man has fallen before us.”
So he spoke, and they all, as he bade them, hurled their spears eager;
but Athena made all of them vain and deprived them of issue.
One man's spear struck fast in the post of the stout-built great hall there,
another man's struck in the door that was closely and strongly fitted;
another man's bronze-heavy ash shaft fell in against the wall there.
But when they had escaped from the suitors' shower of spears then,
to his own men then first spoke out the long-suffering godlike Odysseus:
“Friends, now I think it is time that I speak and direct all among us
to cast at the throng of the suitors, who yearn in their spirit
to kill the two of us, on top of the evils before this.”
So he spoke, and they all let fly their sharp spears together,
aiming straight before them. Odysseus struck Demoptolemus,
Telemachus killed Euryades; Elatus fell to the swineherd,
and the master of cattle killed Peisander there also.
Then all of them together bit down on the monstrous floor there;
and the suitors recoiled to the innermost part of the chamber.
But those men rushed upon them and pulled out their spears from the corpses.
Then again did the suitors let fly their sharp spears eager,
but Athena made many of these as well to fail of their issue.
One man's spear struck fast in the post of the stout-built great hall there,
another man's struck in the door that was closely and strongly fitted;
another man's bronze-heavy ash shaft fell in against the wall there.
But Amphimedon struck Telemachus there on the wrist of his hand, just
grazing him, and the bronze only nicked the skin at the extremity.
And Ctesippus over the shield with his long spear then struck at
Eumaeus' shoulder, but it flew past and fell on the earth there.
Then those men around wise-hearted Odysseus of many devices
cast their sharp spears back in among the crowd of the suitors.
There Odysseus the sacker of cities struck down Eurydamas,
Amphimedon fell to Telemachus, Polybus to the swineherd;
and then the neat-herd, the master and watcher of cattle, struck Ctesippus
full in the chest, and boasting over him spoke out and addressed him:
“Son of Polytherses, lover of mockery, never hereafter
yield to your witless folly and speak some over-proud saying;
leave speech to the gods, since surely they are much stronger than mortals.
Here is a guest-gift back in return for the hoof that you gave once
to godlike Odysseus, while he went like a beggar through his hall.”
So spoke the herdsman in charge of the oxen with curving horns there;
but Odysseus stabbed Damastor's son from nearby with the long spear.
And Telemachus stabbed Leocritus, Evenor's son there,
with his spear in the midriff, and drove the bronze clean through him;
and he pitched on his face and smote the earth with his forehead.
Then Athena lifted on high the man-destroying aegis,
up from the roof overhead, and the minds in them reeled into panic.
Then through the hall they stampeded, like cattle that run in a herd when
the darting gadfly has rushed in among them and set them all shuddering
in the spring season, when all the days are lengthening onward.
And as vultures with hooked claws and beaks curved inward and deadly,
coming down from the mountains, swoop upon flocks of small birds there,
and they skim over the plain, cringing low under the cloud-bank,
but the vultures leap on them and kill them, and no defense comes,
neither escape; and men take joy in watching the hunting;
so these men, rushing around through the house at the suitors before them,
struck them to this side and that; and terrible groaning arose there
from skulls being battered, and all the floor steamed up with bloodshed.
Then Leodes rushed up and clasped Odysseus fast by the knees there,
and beseeching him earnestly spoke these winged words in entreaty:
“By your knees, Odysseus, I implore you; respect me and spare me.
For I declare I never spoke to any of the women
in your halls, nor did I perform any insolent action;
rather I sought to restrain the suitors, if any man acted
in such a way; but they would not obey me and keep off their evil.
Therefore by their own reckless deeds they have earned a shameful destruction.
But I, their seer at the rites, though guilty of nothing among them,
shall lie with the rest; for there is no gratitude after good service.”
Then with a darkening glance wise Odysseus answered and told him:
“If indeed among these men you boast that you are their diviner,
many a time, I suppose, in these halls you have prayed in your spirit
that far from me the fulfilment of sweet homecoming might be,
and that my cherished wife might follow you and bear you children.
Therefore you will not escape from a death most bitter for mourning.”
So then having spoken, he seized with his massive hand a sword there
lying, the one that Agelaus had flung to the ground before him
as he was killed; and he drove it straight through the midst of his neck there.
While he was still speaking, his head was mingled up with the dust then.
Yet still the singer escaped from the black fate hovering near him,
Phemius, Terpes’ son, who had sung among those suitors by compulsion.
He stood there holding within both his hands the clear-toned lyre there
close beside the side-door; and within him his heart was divided,
whether, slipping out of the hall, to go to the great altar of Zeus there,
Zeus of the Court, and sit by the altar well fashioned in stonework,
where Laertes and great Odysseus had often burned there
thighbones of oxen, or else rush forward and clasp at Odysseus’ knees there.
As he turned it about in his mind, this seemed the better decision:
to take hold of the knees of Odysseus, son of Laertes.
Then indeed he set down the hollow lyre on the ground there
midway between the mixing-bowl and the chair with silver studs on it,
and he himself rushed up to Odysseus and clasped at his knees then,
and in entreaty to him he addressed him with winged words, saying:
“By your knees I implore you, Odysseus; respect me and pity.
Grief for this deed will come upon you hereafter, if you kill me,
me, a singer who sings for gods immortal and mortal men also.
I am self-taught, and a god has breathed into my inward spirit
every kind of path for song; and I seem fit to sing in your presence
even as if before a god. Therefore do not desire to cut my throat off.
Telemachus too, your own beloved son, would surely attest this,
that not by my own wish and not from any craving whatever
did I come to your house and sing for the suitors at banquet,
but they were far more numerous, stronger than I, and compelled me.”
So he spoke, and the sacred strength of Telemachus heard him,
and at once he addressed his father, who stood there close beside him:
“Stop, and do not in any way stab this guiltless man with the bronze now.
Let us save Medon the herald as well, who always in our house
cared for me when I was a child in my father’s dwelling,
if indeed Philoetius has not killed him already, or else
the swineherd, or he met your assault as you surged through the hall here.”
So he spoke, and Medon heard him, a man of understanding,
for he lay huddled beneath a chair, and around him an oxhide,
newly flayed, had been wrapped, while he fled from the black doom near him.
Quickly he rose from beneath the chair, and swiftly cast off the oxhide,
then he rushed up to Telemachus and clasped hard at his knees there,
and in entreaty to him he addressed him with winged words, saying:
“Dear friend, here I am, yes, myself; hold back, and tell your father
not to destroy me in his overpowering might with the sharp bronze,
angered against the suitor-men, who kept consuming his substance
here in the halls, and in their folly they gave no thought at all to you.”
Then with a smile wise Odysseus of many devices addressed him:
“Take heart, since this man has held you back and preserved you from ruin,
so that you may know in your heart, and hereafter may tell it to others,
how much better good action is always than wickedness evil.
But now, going outside of the hall, sit down in the courtyard,
out of the bloodshed, both you and the singer renowned among many,
while I within the house accomplish the work that is needful.”
So he spoke, and the two went out from the hall and departed,
and indeed both sat down by the altar of Zeus the Almighty,
glancing around every way, for their hearts still expected destruction.
Then Odysseus looked round through his house, lest any man still there
living might yet have escaped him in hiding from black destruction.
But he saw them all lying in blood and in dust there before him,
many of them, like fishes that fishermen have from the gray sea
dragged in the meshes of nets to the hollow curve of the seashore,
out from the surf of the salt sea; and all of them lie on the sand there
yearning back for the sea-waves, as there on the beaches they sprawl there,
and the shining Sun takes away the life-breath out of them wholly.
So at that time the suitors lay heaped one upon one another.
Then Odysseus of many devices addressed Telemachus, saying:
“Telemachus, come now, call me the nurse Eurycleia,
so that I may speak out the word that within my heart is intended.”
So he spoke, and Telemachus obeyed his beloved father,
and shaking the door he called to the nurse Eurycleia:
“Come here now, rise up, old woman born in the ancient ages,
you who watch over the women servants throughout our great household.
Come now; my father is calling for you, that he may tell you something.”
So he spoke, and for her the message remained not winged, but heeded.
She opened the doors of the well-inhabited halls there before them,
and she went on her way, while Telemachus led on before her.
Then she found great Odysseus among the bodies of the slaughtered,
splashed with blood and with gore, like a lion
that after feeding on some farm bull comes back from the pasture;
all of his chest and his cheeks on both sides there
are blood-smeared, and fearful he looks when a man meets his visage;
so was Odysseus befouled on his feet and his hands up above them.
Then when she saw the dead men and the boundless blood all around them,
straightway she longed to cry out aloud, for she saw a great action;
but Odysseus checked and restrained her, eager though she was,
and calling to her he spoke with winged words in address there:
“In your heart, old woman, rejoice, but hold back and do not cry out;
it is not holy to boast above men who have been slaughtered.
These men the gods’ destiny crushed, and their own brutal actions;
they did not honor any earth-dwelling mortal,
neither the bad nor the good, whoever came there among them;
therefore through their own reckless sins they drew on shameful destruction.
But come now, tell me the women that are here in the chambers,
those who dishonor me, and those who are guiltless and faithful.”
Then in reply the dear nurse Eurycleia addressed him:
“Therefore, my child, I will tell you the truth of the matter.
There are fifty women for you in the halls of the household,
serving-women, whom we have taught to attend to their labors,
both to card out the wool and endure the hardship of bondage.
Of these, twelve have all taken to shameless behavior;
they respect neither me nor Penelope our lady.
Telemachus recently grew to manhood, yet his mother
would not allow him to rule with authority over the women.
But come, let me go up to the shining room in the upper story
and tell your wife, on whom some god has cast a deep slumber.”
Then in reply spoke Odysseus of the many devices:
“Do not awaken her yet; but tell the women here
to come, those very ones who before were devising vile actions.”
So he spoke, and the old nurse went through the hall of the dwelling,
carrying the word to the women and urging them to come forward.
Then to his side he summoned Telemachus, also the cowherd
and the swineherd, and spoke to them winged words in address there:
“Now begin carrying out the dead, and order the women to help you;
after that let them cleanse the beautiful chairs and the tables
using water and sponges that are pierced with many holes.
Then when you have set in order the whole house completely,
lead out the serving-women from the firm-built hall of the household,
to the place between the round room and the excellent fence of the courtyard,
there to strike them with long-edged swords until every one perishes,
till you have taken the life from them and they have forgotten Aphrodite,
whom beneath the suitors they had and enjoyed in secret coupling.”
So he spoke, and the women came in a cluster together,
wailing most terribly, shedding abundant tears in their anguish.
First of all they carried the dead men, the ones who were slaughtered,
and laid them down beneath the portico there in the fenced courtyard,
leaning them on one another; Odysseus gave orders
himself and kept urging them on; and they bore them by compulsion.
After that they cleansed the beautiful chairs and the tables
using water and sponges that were pierced with many holes.
Then Telemachus and the cowherd and also the swineherd
scraped with scrapers the floor of the close-built house of the master;
and the serving-women carried the filth away and put it outside.
But when they had set all the great hall fully in order,
then from the strong-built hall they led out the serving-women,
to the place between the round room and the excellent fence of the courtyard,
and penned them within a strait place where there was no escaping.
Then prudent Telemachus began and spoke out among them:
“No, not by any clean death will I take away the life breath
of these women who poured disgrace upon my head
and on my mother’s, and slept by the side of the suitors.”
So he spoke, and fastening a cable of a dark-prowed vessel
to a great pillar, he looped it around the round chamber,
stretching it taut up high, so none with the feet could touch earth there.
As when long-winged thrushes or doves
dash into a snare that stands in a thicket,
seeking a resting place, and a hateful bed has received them,
so in a row the women held up their heads, and around them all
nooses were fixed on their necks, so that they might die most piteously.
They fluttered with their feet a little while, but not very long there.
Then they led Melanthius out through the porch and across the courtyard;
and from him with pitiless bronze they cut away nose and both ears,
and they pulled out his genitals, to give raw for the dogs to devour,
and in the fury of heart they chopped off his hands and his feet there.
Then after they had washed off both hands and feet of the slaughter,
into the house to Odysseus they went; and the work was accomplished.
Then he spoke to the dear nurse Eurycleia: “
“Bring sulfur, old mother, a cure against evils, and bring me the fire,
so I may sulfur the hall; and bid Penelope also
to come here down to me with her attendant women;
urge all the serving-women as well through the house to come hither.”
Then in reply to him spoke the dear nurse, Eurycleia:
“Yes indeed, my child, what you have said is fitting and proper.
Come then, let me bring you a mantle and tunic for clothing;
do not so, with your broad shoulders wrapped all over in tatters,
stand in the halls of your house; it would be shameful and blameworthy.”
Then resourceful Odysseus answered and spoke to her:
“First of all let there now be fire for me in the hall.”
So he spoke, and the dear nurse Eurycleia did not disobey him,
but she brought him the fire and the sulfur; and then Odysseus
thoroughly fumed the hall and the house and the courtyard around it.
Then the old woman went through the beautiful house of Odysseus,
carrying word to the women and urgently calling them onward.
Out of the hall then they came with torches held in their hands there.
Round him they gathered in throngs and embraced Odysseus closely,
kissing his head and his shoulders in love, and clasping his hands fast.
Then a sweet longing came over his heart for weeping and wailing,
for in his heart and his mind he knew every one of the women.
