The Odyssey — Book 4

Sparta: Helen and Menelaus remember Troy; Proteus; the suitors set their ambush.

Into the hollow Lacedaemon, land of the gorges, they entered,
driving their horses ahead to the house of the lord Menelaus.
There they discovered the king giving a wedding feast to his kinsmen,
honoring both his irreproachable daughter and son in the household.
Her he was sending away to the son of Achilles, the breaker
of battle lines; for at Troy he had promised and nodded agreement
she should be his, and the gods now brought the betrothal to fullness.
Therefore with horses and chariots now he was sending her outward,
bound for the famous city and land of the lordly Myrmidons.
For his own son he was bringing the daughter of Alector from Sparta—
Megapenthes, his well-beloved son, born in the height of
manhood to him by a slave; for the gods gave Helen no further
child after first she had borne him a daughter of radiant beauty,
Hermione, radiant and beautiful as golden Aphrodite.
Thus through the great high-roofed halls they feasted together,
neighbors and kinsmen gathered around the renowned Menelaus,
taking delight; in their midst a singer resembling immortals
sang to the lyre, while two of the tumblers among the assembly,
keeping the time of the music, spun and revolved through the center.
There at the gateway the two young men drew up and halted,
horses beside them— Telemachus and Nestor’s glorious son there.
Eteoneus the hero came from the doorway and saw them,
diligent servant attending the famous and lordly Menelaus;
into the house he went bearing word to the shepherd of peoples.
Standing beside him, he spoke, and his words took wing as he uttered:
“Two unfamiliar men have arrived, Menelaus, Zeus-nurtured;
both in appearance resemble the lineage descended from great Zeus.
Tell me whether we now should unyoke their swift-footed horses,
or send them onward to somebody else who will kindly receive them.”
Deeply indignant, the fair-haired lord Menelaus addressed him:
“Never before were you foolish, Eteoneus, son born of Boethous;
now you are babbling empty and childish words in your folly.
Surely the two of us ate abundant bread at strangers’ tables,
coming here homeward, in hope that at last great Zeus might release us
out of our misery. Hurry and loose the strangers’ horses,
then lead the visitors into the house to partake of the banquet.”
Thus he spoke; and the servant dashed through the hall, and he summoned
all of the other diligent servants to follow behind him.
Under the yoke they loosened the sweating and hard-driven horses,
tethered them there by the mangers, the feeding troughs of the horses,
gave them the grain of the spelt with the white-colored barley commingled,
then tipped the chariot shaft toward the gleaming wall of the entrance,
leading the strangers themselves to the godlike house; and they marveled,
gazing around at the house of the king who was nurtured by great Zeus.
Such was the splendor, as though of the sun or the moon in its shining,
filling the high-roofed house of the famous and lordly Menelaus.
When their eyes found delight in the sight of the glittering riches,
into the polished bathtubs they stepped and refreshed themselves bathing.
After the slave women bathed them and richly anointed with olive oil,
throwing around them the fleecy wool cloaks and the tunics beneath them,
there on the chairs they sat down beside Menelaus, son born of Atreus.
Water for washing a servant brought in a beautiful pitcher
fashioned of gold, and she poured it above the silver basin,
letting them wash, then drew up a polished table beside them.
Bread the respected woman who managed the household brought them,
setting before them abundant provisions and giving them freely.
Platters of every variety of meat the carver uplifted,
set there before them, and placed the golden cups there beside them.
Fair-haired Menelaus welcomed the two with a gesture and told them:
“Take now the food and be welcome; and afterward, when you have tasted
supper together, we then shall ask what manner of men you
are; for the lineage born of your parents is not lost within you.
You are descended from scepter-bearing rulers, the Zeus-born;
never could ordinary people engender such sons as I see here.”
Thus he spoke, and he lifted the fat-rich chine of the roasted ox there,
setting it down before them, the portion of honor they gave him.
Both reached their hands to the excellent food that was ready before them.
Then, when desire for food and for drinking was put from their bodies,
thoughtful Telemachus spoke to the glorious offspring of Nestor,
leaning his head there close, so the others would never overhear him:
“Look here, O son born of Nestor, delight of the heart in my bosom,
look at the flash of the bronze through the house and its echoing chambers,
gold and electrum together, and silver and ivory shining!
Such is the inward court of Olympian Zeus, I imagine,
holding such measureless wealth; I am seized with astonishment, looking.”
Fair-haired Menelaus heard and attended the words he was speaking;
raising his voice to the two, he spoke, and his words took wing outward:
“Dear children, none among mortals may enter a contest with great Zeus,
deathless forever his halls and the wealth he possesses within them.
Yet among men there may be one to rival my wealth, or be no one.
Much have I suffered and far have I wandered to carry it homeward,
borne in my ships; and the eighth revolving year saw my coming.
Wandering Cyprus, Phoenicia, and Egypt with all of its people,
Ethiopians, Sidonian folk, and Erembians I visited,
Libya too, where lambs from the moment of birth have their horn tips,
since in the completed circle of each year sheep bear their young thrice.
There neither lord nor the man who is shepherd is ever found lacking
cheese for his table, or meat, or the sweetness of milk for his drinking;
always the flocks throughout the year give milk for the milking.
Yet while I wandered in foreign lands and was gathering riches,
somebody murdered my brother meanwhile in secrecy, taking
him unaware through the treacherous fraud of his murderous consort.
Therefore no joy do I take in the mastery of these possessions.
All this surely you heard from your fathers, whoever they may be;
greatly I suffered, and lost altogether a flourishing household,
pleasantly furnished and holding abundant and excellent treasure.
Would I were living here now with only a third of the riches,
were those men still alive who died in the years before Troyland,
there in the broad Trojan plain, far away from horse-pasturing Argos!
Yet although I mourn all those men and continually grieve them,
often as here in the halls of the palace I sit in remembrance—
now I delight my heart with weeping, and now I abandon
sorrow, for quickly a man is sated with chill lamentation—
still, for all men together I mourn not so much, though I sorrow,
as for that one man, who makes sleep hateful before me,
makes food hateful, whenever I think; for no other Achaean
labored as much as Odysseus labored and suffered; and all his
portion was sorrow, while mine is a grief that cannot be forgotten,
since he is gone such a long time, and we know nothing about him,
whether he lives or is dead. Surely all of his loved ones are mourning:
aged Laertes and steadfast Penelope, also the young man
Telemachus, whom as a newborn child he abandoned at home there.”
Thus he spoke and awakened in him a longing to mourn for his father.
Tears from his eyelids fell to the ground when he heard of his father;
up to his eyes with both hands lifting his purple-colored
mantle, he hid them. The lord Menelaus observed and considered,
pondering there in the inward depth of his mind and his spirit
whether to let him speak first and name his own father before them,
or to inquire for himself and examine the whole thing in detail.
While in the depth of his mind and his spirit he turned these reflections,
out from her high-roofed fragrant chamber the lady Helen
came, in appearance resembling the gold-distaff goddess Artemis.
Adreste came at her side and arranged a beautiful armchair;
Alcippe carried a rug that was woven of soft-colored fleeces;
Phylo was carrying forth her basket constructed of silver,
gift of Alcandre, the wife of the lord Polybus, dwelling
there in Egyptian Thebes, where houses possess greatest riches.
Two silver bathtubs Polybus gave to the lord Menelaus,
also a pair of tripods and ten whole talents of gold-work.
Apart from these gifts, the wife of Polybus gave Helen fair presents,
giving a distaff of gold and a basket provided with wheels there,
fashioned of silver with rims that were finished in glittering gold-work.
This was the basket her serving maid Phylo brought out and placed by her,
filled with the yarn from the spindle; and over its uppermost surface
lay the distaff, surrounded with wool of a violet darkness.
Down in her chair she sat, with a footstool under her two feet;
straightway she asked of her husband about everything that concerned her:
“Do we already know, Menelaus, O nurtured of great Zeus,
who these men claim themselves to be, who have entered our household?
Shall I conceal the truth, or speak it? My heart tells me to speak it.
Never before, I declare, have I seen such a marvelous likeness,
neither in woman nor man—I am seized with astonishment, looking—
just as this young man resembles the son of great-hearted Odysseus,
young Telemachus, left as a newborn child in the household
when for the sake of my shameless face you Achaeans assembled,
coming to Troy with audacious war in the depth of your spirits.”
Then in reply fair-haired Menelaus addressed Helen, saying:
“Wife, I perceive it as well, just as you have likened and judged him.
Those are the feet of Odysseus, these are his hands in appearance,
such is the glance of his eyes, and the head and the hair that surrounds it.
Just now, as I called Odysseus back to my own recollection,
I was recounting the measure of all he endured and accomplished
there for my sake, while this young man let fall a bitter tear downward,
holding the purple-colored mantle in front of his two eyes.”
Then Peisistratus, Nestor’s glorious son, gave him answer:
“Lord Menelaus, Atreus’ son, Zeus-nurtured commander,
this is indeed the son of that man, exactly as you say.
Yet he is modest in spirit; the heart in his bosom is bashful,
shrinking from pouring an arrogant torrent of words on arrival
here in your presence, whose voice gives joy to us both like a god’s voice.
Nestor, Gerenian horseman and ruler, sent me to join him,
coming along as his escort; for this man desired to behold you,
hoping that you might advise him in some form of word or endeavor.
Many the woes that a son must endure in the house of his father
when he is gone, and no other defenders are standing beside him;
so with Telemachus now: his father is gone, and no others
live in the country to shield him and beat his afflictions away there.”
Then in reply fair-haired Menelaus addressed them, saying:
“Wonderful! Truly the son of a well-beloved man has entered
into my house, whose father endured many trials for my sake.
I used to say I would welcome him over all other Achaeans
if wide-thundering Zeus on Olympus had granted the two of us
safe homecoming over the sea in our own swift ships from the conflict.
I would have founded a city in Argos for him, made a house there,
bringing him out of Ithaca, all his possessions and offspring,
all of his people, and emptying one of the cities around me,
cities that lie all around and submit to my rule as their master.
Living together, we often would mingle, and nothing between us
ever could part us, delighting in love and affectionate friendship,
till the black cloud that is death had enfolded and covered us over.
Yet, I imagine, godhead himself must have looked with resentment,
making that sorrowful man alone unable to reach home.”
Thus he spoke and awakened in all a longing for mourning.
Helen of Argos wept, the daughter of Zeus in her beauty;
young Telemachus wept, Menelaus the offspring of Atreus;
nor could the glorious son born of Nestor keep dry his eyelids,
since in his spirit he thought of the irreproachable man Antilochus,
killed by the radiant son of the shining and early-born Dawn.
Calling him into his mind, he spoke, and his words took wing outward:
“Lord Menelaus, old Nestor always declared you the wisest
man among mortals, whenever at home we remembered your story,
sitting inside of his halls and exchanging our questions and answers.
Therefore, if possible, listen to me, for I take no pleasure
weeping when supper is ended; and Dawn in her earliness soon shall
come to us also. I do not begrudge lamentation for any
mortal who dies and encounters the doom that has been appointed.
This is the only respect that remains for afflicted human beings:
cutting a lock of the hair and letting a tear down the cheek there.
I too had a brother who died, and he was not the meanest
man of the Argives; you knew him, though I neither knew him nor saw him.
Yet they declare that above all others the lord Antilochus
excelled in speed of his feet and excelled as a warrior in battle.”
Then in reply fair-haired Menelaus addressed him, saying:
“Dear friend, all you have spoken is such as a prudent man might have
spoken and acted, even a man who was older than you are.
Such is your father; therefore your words have been fashioned with wisdom.
Easily known is the seed of a man for whom Cronos’ offspring
spins out prosperity both in his marriage and birth of his children,
just as he now has granted to Nestor throughout all his lifetime,
gently to age in his halls in the midst of abundant possessions,
while all his sons are intelligent men and unrivaled with spears there.
Now we shall cease the lamentation that came down upon us,
turning our thoughts once again to the meal; let the servants pour water
over our hands. In the morning again there shall be many stories
young Telemachus and I may exchange and relate to each other.”
Thus he spoke, and Asphalion poured clean water upon them,
diligent servant attending the famous and lordly Menelaus.
Then to the excellent food lying ready they stretched out their two hands.
Helen, the daughter of Zeus, then formed a new thought in her bosom:
into the wine they were drinking at once she cast down a medicine,
quieting anger and grief and bringing forgetfulness of evil.
Whoever drank it once it was thoroughly mixed in the wine bowl
would not allow a tear to descend on his cheeks for a whole day,
not if his mother and father were both lying dead there before him,
not if in front of his face men murdered his brother or dear son,
cutting him down with the bronze, and his own eyes looked on the murder.
Such were the cunning and excellent medicines Zeus’ daughter
owned, given her by Polydamna, the consort of Thon, the Egyptian.
There the grain-giving earth produces the greatest abundance
drugs, many wholesome when mixed, and many a harmful one also.
There every man understands the healer’s art over all the
rest of mankind, for those people spring from the lineage of Paeeon.
After she cast in the drug and commanded the wine to be poured out,
once more taking the thread, she spoke and addressed the assembly:
“Lord Menelaus, Atreus’ son who was nurtured by great Zeus—and you,
sons of courageous men: Zeus gives to one and another
evil and good in their turn, for he holds the power to do all.
Therefore now remain in the halls and delight in the banquet,
taking your joy in the stories, while I shall relate one befitting.
All I could never recount or enumerate fully before you—
all of the trials of steadfast and long-suffering lord Odysseus.
Yet I shall tell you one thing that the mighty man dared and accomplished
there in the country of Troy, where Achaeans endured their afflictions.
He gave his body and shoulders disfiguring blows for concealment;
over his shoulders he threw a contemptible rag, like a house slave,
entering into the broad-wayed city that belonged to his foemen.
There he concealed himself in the form of a different person,
taking the shape of a beggar, though such was he never by our ships.
So he went into the city of Troy, and they all were deceived there;
only I knew who he was and perceived through the likeness he carried.
I put him questions, but he in his cunning continually shunned me.
Yet when at last I had bathed him and rubbed his body with olive oil,
put the clothes on his body, and sworn a powerful oath there,
never to name Odysseus or reveal him among the Trojans
till he had come to the swift-running ships and Achaean encampment,
then he disclosed every plan the Achaean people were forming.
Many the Trojans he killed with the long-edged bronze on his passage
back to the Argive encampment, bringing abundant intelligence.
All of the other women of Troy gave shrill lamentation;
joy filled the heart in my bosom, for already it turned to the homeward
journey, and late I regretted the madness the goddess Aphrodite
gave when she led me away to that place from the land of my fathers,
leaving my child and the bridal chamber and husband behind me,
one who was lacking in neither his mind nor his bodily beauty.”
Then in reply fair-haired Menelaus addressed Helen, saying:
“Wife, you have given the whole of the story with fitting proportion.
Many the minds and the counsels of warlike men I have studied,
wandering also across an abundance of earth in my lifetime;
never, however, did these two eyes of mine look on another
heart such as steadfast and long-suffering lord Odysseus carried.
Hear now another deed that the mighty man dared and accomplished,
done in the polished wooden horse where the best of the Argives
all were concealed, bearing slaughter and death to the people of Troyland.
Then you approached us—a god must have moved you to make the endeavor,
one who desired to give the Trojans the glory of triumph—
while in your steps followed godlike Deiphobus closely.
Three times around the hollow ambush you circled and stroked it,
calling aloud by their names the most excellent men of the Danaans,
copying perfectly there the voice of each Argive’s consort.
Tydeus’ son and I and the noble and steadfast Odysseus,
sitting among all the others, heard clearly whenever you called us.
Both of us sprang with desire either then to arise and go outward,
or to reply to you straightway and answer your voice from the inside.
Yet Odysseus restrained us and checked our desire as we struggled.
Then all the other sons of the host of Achaeans were silent;
only Anticlus continued determined to give you an answer.
Yet with the strength of his hands Odysseus closed up his mouth and
held him unyieldingly so, and he rescued the whole of the war host,
holding him till the goddess Athena conducted you elsewhere.”
Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:
“Lord Menelaus, Atreus’ son, Zeus-nurtured commander,
greater the grief, for none of these deeds kept away bitter death-doom,
not if the heart in the depth of his bosom were fashioned of iron.
Come now, send us away to our beds, so at last we may settle
down in repose and delight in the sweetness of sleep there together.”
Thus he spoke, and Helen of Argos commanded the slave women
under the porch to set out the bedsteads and lay on their surfaces
beautiful purple blankets, and rugs to be spread there above them,
fleecy wool cloaks on top of them all for the sleepers’ protection.
Out from the hall they went with the fire-blazing torches they carried,
making the beds, while the herald conducted the strangers before him.
There in the forecourt both of the traveling heroes reposed then,
young Telemachus and the glorious offspring of Nestor.
Atreus’ son lay down in the inward room of the high house;
close by his side long-robed Helen, most radiant of women.
When Dawn in her earliness rose with her rose-colored fingers,
then Menelaus renowned for the war cry rose from his bedstead,
put on his clothing, and slung the sharp-edged sword round his shoulder,
under his glittering feet bound the beautiful sandals securely,
out of the chamber emerging in bodily form like a godhead.
Close by Telemachus then he sat and addressed him by name there:
“What kind of need has conducted you here, O hero Telemachus,
into the shining Lacedaemon over the broad back of ocean?
Is it a public affair or a private? Reveal the truth plainly.”
Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:
“Lord Menelaus, Atreus’ son, Zeus-nurtured commander,
I have arrived in the hope you may tell me a word of my father.
Men consume my household, and all my abundant fields are destroyed now;
hostile men have crowded the house, and continually slaughter
all my abundant sheep and my lumbering crooked-horned cattle—
suitors who court my mother in overbearing transgression.
Therefore I come to your knees in the hope you consent to inform me,
telling the bitter death that he met, whether you were an eyewitness,
or from the speech of another unfortunate wanderer heard it.
More than all others his mother gave birth to the man for affliction.
Do not diminish the story from pity or courtesy toward me;
tell me in full every sight that your own eyes encountered before you.
Hear my entreaty: if ever my excellent father Odysseus
promised a word or an action to you and fulfilled what he promised
there in the country of Troy, where Achaeans endured their afflictions,
call it to mind for me now, and reveal the infallible true word.”
Deeply indignant, the fair-haired lord Menelaus addressed him:
“Shame! In the bed of a steadfast and strong-hearted man they are wishing
all to lie down, those spineless and altogether cowardly creatures!
Just as a deer puts her newborn fawns, still unweaned and reclining,
into the lair in the thicket of some overpowering lion,
then on the foothills and grassy ravines goes seeking her pasture,
grazing abroad; and the lion returns to the place of his bedding,
bringing a destiny ugly and cruel to each of the young ones—
such an abhorrent doom shall Odysseus bring on those people.
Father Zeus and Athena and Phoebus Apollo, if only
such as he once was in strongly built Lesbos, the lord Odysseus,
rose to the wrestling challenge and grappled with Philomeleides,
hurled him down with tremendous force, while Achaeans rejoiced there—
let that Odysseus come on the suitors in such an appearance!
Swift would the death be for all, and the marriage exceedingly bitter.
Yet for the thing you inquire of me and beseech me to answer,
I shall not swerve from the truth with evasive narration or trick you.
All the infallible Ancient of Ocean declared and revealed to me,
not one word shall I hide from you now or conceal in my bosom.
There in the land of Egypt the gods still held me away from my homeward
though I desired it, since I did not offer completed hecatombs.
Gods ever wish that their full commandments be kept in remembrance.
There is an island that lies in the great sea’s turbulent waters,
there at the mouth of Egyptian lands, and they call it the island
Pharos, as far from the shore as a hollow-built vessel may travel
all of a day when a whistling wind blows loudly behind her.
There is a harbor upon it with anchorage excellent, whence men
launch their symmetrical vessels to sea after drawing the black water.
There for a period twenty days the gods held me; and never
blew an appropriate wind that could carry a ship on its journey
over the broad and enormous back of the fish-thronging sea-way.
All our provisions by then would have failed, and the strength of the shipmen,
had not a goddess taken compassion and rescued me from it:
daughter of Proteus, powerful Ancient of Ocean, the lady
Eidothea, whose heart I had moved more deeply than others.
She encountered me wandering there far apart from my comrades,
who continually roved round the island and fished for their dinner,
bending their hooks, since hunger was pinching the depth of their bellies.
Standing beside me, the goddess addressed me and gave me instruction:
‘Are you a fool, stranger, and excessively slow of perception,
or do you choose to be slack and delight in the pain you are suffering?
Long have you now been held on the island, unable to discover
any escape, while the hearts of your comrades are dwindling within them.’
Thus did she speak, and at once I replied and addressed her in answer:
‘I shall declare it to you, whoever you are among goddesses:
not by my free inclination am I being held on the island.
Surely I sinned against the immortals who govern broad heaven.
Tell me, however—for gods understand everything that is hidden—
which of the deathless immortals has shackled me here and obstructed
all my return, and how I may sail over the fish-thronging sea-way.’
Thus did I speak, and the radiant goddess at once gave me answer:
‘Then I shall tell you, O stranger, and all that I tell shall be truthful.
Here there is dwelling a deathless, infallible Ancient of Ocean,
Proteus out of Egyptian waters, who knows every ocean
depth, and he serves the earth-shaking lord Poseidon beneath him.
People declare he is father to me and the one who engendered me.
If you by any device could ambush the god and secure him,
he would reveal to you both the road and the length of the journey,
also your homecoming, how you may sail over fish-thronging sea-way.
He would reveal to you also, O Zeus-descended, if you ask him,
all that was done in your house, whether evil or good in its outcome,
while you were gone on your lengthy and difficult road of returning.’
Thus did she speak, and at once I replied and addressed her in answer:
‘You must devise the ambush yourself for the ancient immortal,
lest he perceive me before I can seize him or know and escape me.
Difficult is it for any mortal man ever to master godhead.’
Thus did I speak, and the radiant goddess at once gave me answer:
‘Then I shall tell you, O stranger, and all that I tell shall be truthful.
When in his course Helios bestrides the middle of heaven,
then from the sea comes the deathless and infallible Ancient of Ocean,
under the West Wind’s breath, in the dark-colored shiver of water;
out he emerges and lies down under the hollowed-out caverns.
Seals gather round him, the brood of the beautiful daughter of ocean,
crowded together in sleep after coming from gray-colored seawater,
breathing the pungent and terrible odor of deep briny water.
There I shall lead you myself at the earliest showing of daylight,
lay you in order; but carefully choose three men from your comrades,
all of the best you possess by your vessels with well-fitted benches.
I shall reveal every cunning device the old god may employ there.
First he shall go to the seals and count every one as he passes;
after he counts them by fives and has looked at the whole of the number,
down in their midst he shall lie like a shepherd at rest in his sheep flock.
Then at the moment you see he is settled and lying among them,
strength and the force of your hands must remain at the heart of your thinking.
Hold him securely for all of his struggling and striving to flee you.
Every device he shall try, transforming to all living creatures
crawling the earth, then changing to water and god-kindled firelight;
hold him unshaken, however, and press him with greater compulsion.
Yet when at last he himself puts a question in words and addresses
you in the same outward shape he possessed when you saw him lie sleeping,
then, O hero, relax your force and release the old godhead.
Ask which divinity troubles you so and blocks you from homeward,
also your homecoming, how you may sail over fish-thronging sea-way.’
Thus having spoken, she plunged underneath the turbulent sea swell.
Back to the ships I returned where they stood in the sand of the seashore;
darkly the heart in my bosom was troubled by many reflections.
Then, when I came to the edge of the sea and the vessel awaiting,
there we prepared and consumed our supper, and ambrosial nighttime
came, and we laid ourselves down on the surf-beaten strand of the sea-way.
When Dawn in her earliness rose with her rose-colored fingers,
then I proceeded along the shore of the wide-wayed sea there,
earnestly praying to gods, and I brought three men of my comrades,
all whom I trusted the most in every variety of venture.
Meanwhile under the wide-curving bosom of ocean she entered,
bringing four sealskins up from the depth of the sea to the surface,
newly stripped off, and against her father she plotted an ambush.
Beds she had hollowed for us in the sand at the edge of the sea-way,
where she awaited our coming; and close at her side we assembled.
Down she arranged us in order and threw one skin upon each man.
There the ambush would prove most cruel and difficult to us:
terribly wearied we were by the death-dealing stench of the sea seals.
Who would choose to lie down by a monster engendered in ocean?
Yet she herself brought rescue and furnished abundant assistance,
placing ambrosia under the nose of each man in the ambush,
breathing sweetness that mastered the terrible stench of the creatures.
All of the morning we waited there with enduring and strong hearts.
Out of the water the seals in a crowd came together, and afterward
down in their order they lay on the surf-beaten strand of the sea-way.
Out of the sea at noon the ancient arrived and discovered
all of his well-fed seals, and he went among all and he counted.
First he included us there in his count of the beasts, while his spirit
never suspected deception; and then he lay down there among them.
Shouting aloud, we rushed him at once and surrounded his body
there with our arms; but the ancient remembered his difficult cunning.
First he became a tremendous lion with beautiful mane there,
then a tremendous serpent, a leopard, a mountain-sized boar there;
then he became running water and then a high tree full of foliage.
Still we held firm with unshakable grip and enduring spirits.
Yet when at last the old god had grown tired of all his devices,
then he began to inquire of me there and address me directly:
‘Which of the gods devised this counsel with you, son born of Atreus,
so you could ambush and hold me against my desire? What need moves you?’
Thus did he speak, and at once I replied and addressed him in answer:
‘Ancient, you know; why put me a sideways question about it?
Long I have now been held on the island, unable to discover
any escape, while the heart in the depth of my bosom is dwindling.
Tell me, however—for gods understand everything that is hidden—
which of the deathless immortals has shackled me here and obstructed
all my return, and how I may sail over the fish-thronging sea-way.’
Thus did I speak, and immediately he gave me this answer:
‘You should have offered to Zeus and the other immortals fine victims
ere you embarked, so that quickly you might reach the land of your fathers,
sailing your ship on the surface of ocean’s wine-colored water.
It is not destined for you to behold your friends and arrive at
home with its strong-built walls and the country and land of your fathers,
till once again you have entered the water of Egypt and traveled
up that heaven-descended river and offered holy hecatombs
there to the gods everlasting who govern the breadth of the heavens.
Then shall the gods give the road that your heart has desired to travel.’
Thus did he speak, and the heart in the depth of my bosom was broken,
since he had sent me again on the mist-covered sea-way to Egypt,
making me travel once more on the long and the difficult roadway.
Still I addressed him and spoke out a word in reply to his counsel:
‘Ancient, I shall accomplish it all in the way you command me.
Come now, reveal to me this, and reveal the whole truth in your answer:
did all Achaeans return in their ships without harm to their homelands,
all whom Nestor and I left behind when we sailed out from Troyland?
Or did one suffer a bitter death in the hull of his vessel,
or in the arms of his friends when he wound the war to completion?’
Thus did I speak, and immediately he gave me this answer:
‘Atreus’ son, why question me this? You have no necessity
either to know or discover my mind; and I say you shall not long
keep yourself free from tears when the whole of the story has reached you.
Many were slaughtered, and many remained; but only two leaders
died among bronze-armored chiefs of Achaeans upon the return road;
you were yourself a witness of battle; but one man is living,
held in a place far away on the breadth of the measureless sea-way.
Ajax was shattered and lost by his long-oared vessels forever.
First, great Poseidon impelled him against the tremendous Gyraean
rocks, but he rescued him even then from the sea and destruction.
He would have fled from the doom, although he was hated by Pallas,
had he not hurled out an arrogant word in the depth of his blindness,
saying that, spite of the gods, he escaped from the great gulf of ocean.
Lordly Poseidon heard as he shouted his arrogant boasting;
straightway he took in his powerful hands the three-pronged trident,
struck the Gyraean rock, and he split it apart in the middle.
Part of it stood in its place, while the part that was broken fell seaward,
that very piece where Ajax sat when his mind was enormously blinded;
down it conveyed him into the endless and turbulent sea depth.
There he died after drinking his fill of the salt-colored water.
Somehow your brother escaped and avoided the fates of destruction,
traveling safe in his hollow-built ships, for the lady Hera preserved him.
Yet when he nearly had come to the lofty and steep-sided summit
there at Malea, a tempestuous wind snatched him suddenly upward,
carried him heavily groaning across the fish-thronging sea-way,
onto the furthest border of country where Thyestes once had
made his dwelling, and now his own son Aegisthus was living.
Yet from that place safe homecoming also at last was revealed him;
gods turned the wind to an excellent course, and at home they arrived then.
Gladly he placed both his feet on the land of his fathers and kissed it,
clasping his country, while many a hot tear streamed from his eyelids,
such was the joy in his heart to behold his own country before him.
Yet from a high place the watchman who guarded the country perceived him,
he whom Aegisthus, the crooked deviser, positioned as watchman,
promising two full talents of gold as his wages; a whole year
there he had watched, lest the king pass by and remember his war strength.
Carrying news to the house, he reported to the shepherd of peoples.
Straightway Aegisthus devised a treacherous scheme in his bosom:
picking the twenty best of the men he possessed in the country,
setting an ambush, and ordering there in the hall a feast readied.
Then with his horses and chariots went to invite Agamemnon,
shepherd of peoples, while harboring unspeakable purpose within him.
Leading him up unaware of his death, he killed him at dinner,
just as a man at the manger cuts down an ox for the slaughter.
Not one companion of Atreus’ son who had followed remained there,
nor one man of Aegisthus; they all were cut down in the palace.’
Thus did he speak, and the heart in the depth of my bosom was broken.
Sitting in sand I wept, and the heart in my bosom no longer
wished to continue to live or to look on the bright light of Helios.
Yet when at last I was sated with weeping and writhing in sorrow,
then the infallible Ancient of Ocean addressed me and told me:
‘Atreus’ son, no longer continue this rigid and ceaseless
weeping, for never shall any remedy come of it. Rather,
quickly devise how again you may come to the land of your fathers.
Either you still shall discover Aegisthus living, or noble
Orestes already has killed him, and you may arrive for the burial.’
Thus did he speak; and the heart and the resolute spirit within me,
even although I was grieved, grew warm once again in my bosom.
Raising my voice, I addressed him, and these words took wing as I uttered:
‘Now I have learned of these men, but name me the third in the story,
that one alive and still held back on the broad sea’s surface,
or one dead; though grieving, I still have desire to hear of him.’
Thus did I speak, and immediately he gave me this answer:
‘Laertes’ son, whose house is established in Ithaca’s country.
Him I beheld on an island, letting the great tears fall downward,
there in the halls of Calypso the nymph, who continues to hold him
forcibly there, and he cannot return to the land of his fathers,
since no ships with their oars are beside him and no companions
able to carry him over the broad and enormous back of the sea-way.
Yet for yourself, Menelaus, O Zeus-descended, it is not
fated for death to arrive in horse-pasturing Argos and take you.
Gods everlasting instead shall convey you to Elysian country,
there at the earth’s end where the fair-haired lord Rhadamanthus is living,
there where the easiest life is provided for all human beings.
Snow never comes, no tempestuous winter and never the rainfall;
always from Ocean the singing and soft-blowing breath of the West Wind
rises to give human beings refreshment and coolness of spirit,
since Helen is your wife and therefore you are son-in-law to great Zeus.’
Thus having spoken, he plunged underneath the turbulent sea swell.
Back to the ships I returned with my godlike traveling companions;
darkly the heart in my bosom was troubled by many reflections.
Then, when we came to the edge of the sea and the vessel awaiting,
there we prepared and consumed our supper, and ambrosial nighttime
came, and we laid ourselves down on the surf-beaten strand of the sea-way.
When Dawn in her earliness rose with her rose-colored fingers,
first of all we dragged down the vessels to glittering seawater,
setting the masts and the sails in the ships with symmetrical bodies.
Men then boarded the ships and sat down in their places at oarlocks;
seated in order, they struck with the oars on the gray-colored water.
Back to the waters of Egypt I brought my assembled vessels,
up the heaven-descended river, and offered full hecatombs there.
Then, when I laid to rest the wrath of the gods everlasting,
over the king Agamemnon I heaped up a mound for his deathless
fame. This done, I sailed, and the gods everlasting provided
wind and immediately brought me again to the land of my fathers.
Come now, remain as a guest in the halls of my household a little,
staying until the eleventh or twelfth day arrives in its season.
Then I shall send you away with due honor and give you fine presents:
three strong horses together with one well-polished conveyance;
also a beautiful cup, so that you may pour to immortals,
always remembering me through all of the days of your lifetime.”
Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:
“Atreus’ son, do not hold me for any long time in your household.
Gladly I might for a year remain here and sit at your side still,
feeling no longing arise for my home or the parents who bore me,
such a strange and miraculous joy do I take in the tales you deliver,
also your words; but my own companions are restive already,
waiting in sacred Pylos, and you would retain me here longer.
As for the gift you are giving, let it be some treasure I carry.
Horses I shall not conduct to Ithaca; here I shall leave them
for you to keep and your glory, for you are the lord of a broad plain,
where an abundance of lotus and galingale grows for the horses,
wheat and the grain of the spelt and the broad white barley for fodder.
Ithaca holds no broad-running courses or pasture land open;
goat-feeding country, more lovely to me than a horse-feeding country.
None of the islands that lean toward the sea is a land made for horses,
none is rich in its meadows, and Ithaca less than the others.”
Thus he spoke, and Menelaus renowned for the war cry smiled there;
stroking him there with his hand, he addressed him aloud by his name there:
“Dear child, you are of excellent blood, as your speech makes apparent.
Therefore I gladly shall alter the gifts, since I have the power.
Out of the many treasures that lie in the halls of my household,
I shall present you the one most beautiful and most highly valued:
one mixing bowl elaborately wrought, made wholly of silver,
while all the rims have been given their finish in glittering gold-work,
workmanship done by Hephaestus. The hero and king Phaedimus,
lord of Sidonian people, presented the bowl when his household
sheltered me on my returning journey. This gift I give you.”
Thus they exchanged such words in the presence of one another.
Feasting companions came to the house of the godlike ruler,
driving the sheep and carrying heart-strengthening wine to the banquet;
women with beautiful veils sent bread to the palace before them.
Thus they continued to labor and ready the feast in the household.
Meanwhile suitors assembled in front of Odysseus’ palace,
taking delight in the discus and casting their javelins outward,
there on the leveled ground where they always were playing, insolent.
There sat Antinous, also the godlike lord Eurymachus,
leaders of suitors and greatly surpassing the rest in their prowess.
Noemon, Phronius’ son, approached and stood before them,
asking Antinous there and addressing him openly with questions:
“Tell me, Antinous, whether we know or do not know
when young Telemachus comes from the sandy country of Pylos.
Taking my ship he departed, and I have a need for the vessel,
meaning to cross to the broad dance grounds of Elis, where twelve young
mares I possess with their sturdy mule foals nursing beneath them,
still unbroken, and one I would drive from the herd and then break him.”
Thus he spoke; and they marveled in heart, for they never imagined
he had proceeded to Neleian Pylos; instead he was somewhere
close in the fields with the flocks or beside the keeper of swine there.
Then in reply spoke Antinous, son of Eupeithes:
“Tell me the truth of the matter: what day did he leave, and what young men
went at his side? Were they chosen Ithacans, or were they his own hired
servants and slaves? He could manage even this kind of venture.
Tell me this also truly, that I may understand clearly:
did he take off with the black-hulled ship by force and unwilling
leave you, or freely did you give it because his fair words had persuaded?”
Then Noemon, the son of Phronius, gave him his answer:
“Freely I gave it myself. What else could another man have done
when such a man, with such cares weighing heavily down on his spirit,
asked him? It would have been difficult surely to withhold the favor.
All of the young men who followed are best in the whole of the country
after ourselves; and I saw their leader embark on the vessel,
Mentor—or else it was godhead exactly resembling Mentor.
Yet this fills me with wonder: I saw noble Mentor here only
yesterday early at dawn, though he boarded the vessel for Pylos.”
Thus having spoken, he went to the house of his father and left them.
Both men’s insolent hearts were stunned with the news that he gave them.
There in a body they seated the suitors and stopped all the contests.
Then Antinous, son of Eupeithes, addressed the assembly,
furious, while in the depth of his heart black anger was brimming,
filling him greatly with wrath, and his eyes were like blazing firelight:
“Curse it! A terrible deed has been arrogantly accomplished,
this expedition of young Telemachus; we said it would fail him.
Simply in spite of the whole of us one mere boy has departed,
hauling a ship to the sea and selecting the best in the country.
Soon he shall be our beginning of evil. May Zeus end his power
ere he attains to the measure of manhood and strength of his lifetime!
Come then, give me a swift-running ship and companions of twenty,
so I may watch for and ambush the man on the course of his homeward
passage between the rugged land Samos and Ithaca’s country.
Thus may his sailing in search of his father end bitter and costly.”
Thus he spoke, and they all gave approval and urged the endeavor.
Straightway rising, they entered the house of the lord Odysseus.
Nor did Penelope long remain unaware of the secret
purpose the suitors devised and were weaving in depth of their spirits.
Medon the herald informed her, for he had heard all of their counsels,
standing outside of the court while within they were weaving the ambush.
Into the house he went bearing word to the lady Penelope.
Just as he crossed the threshold, Penelope asked him directly:
“Herald, why have the arrogant suitors dispatched you to find me?
Is it to tell all the slave women serving the lordly Odysseus
they must abandon their tasks and prepare the men’s feast in the household?
May they no longer be suitors or gather again in the future;
may this meal be the last they consume in this place all together,
those who continually swarm here and shear away all of the livelihood,
all the possessions belonging to thoughtful and steadfast Telemachus!
Did you not hear in the years long ago, when you still were but children,
what kind of man among all of your fathers the lord Odysseus
was, never doing a deed beyond measure or speaking unjustly
there in the country, although this is often the custom of godlike
kings: they may hate one mortal and love one mortal in turn there.
Never, however, did he commit violence against any person.
Now your own hearts have been shown and the ugliness of your endeavors:
afterward no gratitude lives for the good that a man has accomplished.”
Medon the herald, a man of intelligence, gave her his answer:
“Would that this evil, my queen, were the worst that the suitors intended!
Something much greater and harder to bear they are plotting among them;
may Cronos’ son never bring it to pass and fulfill their intention.
They are determined to kill Telemachus there with the sharp bronze
during his homeward journey; he sailed out in search of his father,
going to sacred Pylos and shining Lacedaemon.”
Thus he spoke, and her knees and the heart in her body were loosened;
long she was gripped by a speechlessness holding the words she would utter.
Tears filled her eyes, and the flower of the voice in her throat was arrested.
Yet in the end she found words and addressed him in answer, inquiring:
“Herald, why has my child departed? There was no necessity
he should embark on the fast-running ships that serve human beings
there as the horses of ocean and cross the great waters of sea-way.
Is it intended that not even his name shall be left among mortals?”
Medon the herald, a man of intelligence, gave her his answer:
“I do not know if some god aroused him, or whether his own heart
drove him to Pylos, that there he might learn and discover his father’s
homeward return, or else what destiny finally met him.”
Thus having spoken, he went through the house of the lord Odysseus.
Then the pain eating the heart poured around her; she no longer could bear to
sit any longer, though chairs stood abundant throughout the household;
down on the threshold she sank by the richly constructed bedchamber,
pitifully moaning; and all of the slave women whimpered around her,
every one living within the household, both younger and older.
Sobbing intensely, Penelope spoke to the women around her:
“Listen, beloved women; Olympian Zeus has allotted
sorrows to me above women who grew and were born in my lifetime.
Long ago I lost my noble and lion-hearted husband,
graced among all of the Danaans with every form of excellence,
that noble man whose glory spreads over Hellas and Argos.
Now once more have the tempest winds snatched my beloved son from me,
out of the halls without glory, and never I heard his departure.
Cruel-hearted women! Not one of you even considered
waking me out of my bed, though you understood perfectly clearly
when he went down to the hollow black vessel awaiting his coming.
Had I discovered that he was considering such an expedition,
either he would have remained, though he greatly desired the journey,
or he would have left me behind in the halls after death overtook me.
Come then, let one of you run and summon the old man Dolius,
slave my father presented to me when I came to the household,
he who attends to my orchard of many trees, so that swiftly
he may sit down by Laertes and tell him the whole of the story.
Maybe Laertes shall weave some counsel in depth of his bosom,
coming before all the people to weep and implore them, who purpose
utterly ruining both his own line and the line of Odysseus.”
Then Eurycleia, the well-loved nurse, gave answer and told her:
“Beloved child, either kill me with bronze that is pitiless, or else
leave me alive in the house, but I shall not hide from you longer.
All this I knew, and I gave him whatever provisions he ordered,
bread and the honey-sweet wine; but he made me swear a tremendous
oath not to tell you the truth till the twelfth day came in its season,
or you yourself missed him and learned that the young man departed,
lest with your weeping you mar the beautiful skin of your body.
Now you must bathe and put fresh clothing around your body,
then with the slave women serving you go to the room at the rooftop,
pray to Athena, the daughter of Zeus who possesses the aegis.
She still may save him, even if death has already surrounded.
Do not afflict with more sorrow an old man already in sorrow.
I do not think that the gods everlasting entirely hate the
line of Arceisius’ son; one man shall survive who possesses
both the high-roofed house and the fertile and far-spreading farmland.”
Thus did she speak, lulled the grief, and restrained both her eyelids from weeping.
Then Penelope bathed and put fresh clothing around her body,
went with the slave women serving her up to the room at the rooftop,
setting the barley grains in a basket and praying Athena:
“Hear me, Unwearying daughter of Zeus who possesses the aegis!
If the Odysseus of manifold counsels within this household
ever burned fatty thighbones for you from an ox or a sheep here,
call them to mind for me now, and preserve my beloved son safely;
beat the oppressive and wickedly arrogant suitors away now.”
Thus did she cry, and the goddess Athena attended her prayer.
Meanwhile suitors made clamor throughout all the shadowy chambers,
and one of the arrogant younger men spoke to another:
“Surely the queen who is courted by many prepares for a marriage
here with one of us, knowing no part of the death of her son there.”
So they would speak, knowing nothing of what was prepared in the darkness.
Then Antinous addressed them all in the midst of assembly:
“Fools, you must keep altogether away from all arrogant speeches,
lest somebody carry the word to the queen who remains in the inside.
Come, let us silently rise and bring to accomplishment quickly
that same plan which delighted the heart in the bosom of each man.”
Thus he spoke and selected the twenty best men among them.
Down to the swift-running ship and the sand-covered seashore they hastened.
First of all they dragged down the vessel to deep-colored water,
setting the mast and the sails in the black-colored ship for the passage.
All of the oars they fitted inside of the leather-made oar straps,
all in appropriate order, and spread out the white sail above them.
High-hearted servants carried the weapons and placed them aboard there.
Out in the water they moored her securely and came to the seashore,
ate their supper together and waited for evening to reach them.
Yet in the upper room the attentive Penelope rested,
fasting there and tasting no food and no drink for her comfort,
turning in mind whether her irreproachable son should evade death,
or be destroyed by the overbearing and arrogant suitors.
Just as a lion turns in the midst of a crowd of the huntsmen,
terrified as they insidiously close their circle around him,
so she was turning in thought when the depth of the sleep came upon her.
Backward she leaned and slept, and the whole of her body was loosened.
Then the gray-eyed goddess Athena devised a new counsel.
Making a phantom, she fashioned its body resembling a woman,
Iphthime, daughter of great-hearted lord Icarius,
wedded to Eumelus, who made his home in the country of Pherae.
This she dispatched to the house of the godlike hero Odysseus,
so it might bring to Penelope, weeping and making lamentation,
respite from sorrowful tears and the pain of her mourning and weeping.
Into the chamber it came by the strap that secured the door bolt there,
stood at the head of her bed and addressed her and gave her instruction:
“Do you sleep, Penelope, while the heart in your body is grieving?
No, the gods everlasting who live without trouble shall never
let you lament and be anguished, for still your son has a homeward
journey; he has committed no sin in the sight of immortals.”
Then the attentive Penelope gave the phantom an answer,
sleeping exceedingly sweet at the shadowy gateway of dreamland:
“Why have you come to me now, dear sister? You never before were
accustomed to visit, because you live very far from my household.
Yet you command me to cease from my misery, also the many
sorrows that swarm in the depth of my mind and my heart without ceasing.
Long ago I lost my noble and lion-hearted husband,
graced among all of the Danaans with every form of excellence,
that noble man whose glory spreads over Hellas and Argos.
Now once more my beloved son has departed in hollow-built vessel,
only a boy, unpracticed in labor and councils of manhood.
Therefore I mourn for the young man even more deeply than that one;
trembling for him and fearing lest something befall him and hurt him,
whether among the men of the land where he went or at sea there.
Many the enemies plotting against him and longing to kill him,
ere he returns once again to the land and the home of his fathers.”
Then the shadowy phantom replied to her words and addressed her:
“Take heart now, and do not excessively fear in your spirit.
Such an attendant goes by his side as all other men have
prayed might be standing beside them, for she has power to protect him—
Pallas Athena, who pities your mourning and all your affliction;
she is the one who has sent me to tell you the truth of this matter.”
Then the attentive Penelope answered the phantom and told it:
“If you are truly a god and have heard a divinity’s true voice,
come then, reveal to me also the man so greatly afflicted:
whether he still lives somewhere and looks on the light of the sun there,
or he is dead and already has gone to the household of Hades.”
Then the shadowy phantom replied to her words and addressed her:
“Of that man I shall not reveal to you all of the story,
whether he lives or is dead, for it is evil to speak empty language.”
Thus having spoken, it slipped by the bolt at the post of the doorway,
into the breath of the winds; and the daughter of lord Icarius
started awake from her sleep, and the heart in her bosom was warmed then,
such was the vividness there of the dream in the dark of the nighttime.
Meanwhile suitors had boarded and sailed on the watery pathways,
turning the sheer murder of young Telemachus over within them.
There is a rocky island that lies in the middle of ocean,
midway between the rugged land Samos and Ithaca’s country,
Asteris, not very large, but it holds twin harbors upon it,
both fit for ships to lie hidden. Achaeans awaited in ambush.
