The Odyssey — Book XV

Telemachus called home; Theoclymenus; the life of Eumaeus.

But to wide-dancing Lacedaemon went Pallas Athena,
seeking the splendid son of great-hearted Odysseus,
to remind him of homecoming and to urge his returning.
There she found Telemachus and Nestor’s glorious offspring
sleeping there in the forecourt of battle-famed Menelaus.
Nestor’s son in truth lay subdued by the softness of slumber;
but upon Telemachus sweet sleep did not settle, for inward
through the immortal night care for his father kept waking.
Standing close beside him then spoke the gray-eyed Athena:
“Telemachus, it is no longer well to wander far from your household,
leaving your treasures behind and men in your halls there,
men so arrogant, lest they consume and divide all your substance,
sharing your wealth among them, and your journey prove wasted.
Therefore urge with all speed Menelaus, good at the war-cry,
to send you away, so you still may find your blameless mother.
For already her father and brothers are urging upon her
marriage with Eurymachus, since he surpasses the others,
all the suitors, with gifts, and increases the bridal-presents.
See that none of your substance is carried away from the household
against your will; for you know what the mind of a woman is like.
She is eager to prosper the house of the man who has married her,
and of her earlier children and wedded beloved husband,
once he is dead, she remembers no more and asks nothing.
But you, going yourself, must entrust all things in your household
to that one of the serving-women who seems to you best,
until such time as the gods make known your noble bedfellow.
Yet another thing will I tell you; lay this up in your spirit.
Chosen men of the suitors are lying in ambush against you
in the strait between Ithaca and rugged Samos,
longing to kill you before you reach your fatherland’s country.
But I do not think it will be so; before that, the earth shall
cover some suitor or other who feed on your living.
Keep your well-fashioned ship at a distance, away from the islands,
and keep sailing by night as well; and one of the immortals
who guards you and saves you will send a fair wind from behind.
But whenever you come to the first shore of Ithaca,
send on the ship to the city, and all your companions with her,
while you yourself before all things go to the swineherd,
him who tends your swine and whose heart is kindly toward you.
There remain for the night; then urge him to go to the city,
carrying news to prudent Penelope there in the household,
telling her that you are safe and have come back from Pylos.”
So having spoken, she departed away to far Olympus.
Then he awakened the son of Nestor from sweet sleep beside him,
moving him with his foot, with a kick, and he spoke these words to him:
“Wake now, Peisistratus, son of Nestor, and lead out the single-hoofed horses,
yoke them under the chariot, so we may make speed on the journey.”
Then in answer to him spoke Peisistratus, Nestor’s offspring:
“Telemachus, there is no way, though eager we are for the journey,
to drive through the murk of the night; but soon there will be dawn-light.
Rather remain until Atreus’ son, the hero Menelaus,
famous with the spear, has brought out gifts and set them in the chariot,
and with gentle words has spoken and sent us forth on our journey.
For all his days a guest remembers ever thereafter
one who has shown him friendship and given him generous welcome.”
So he spoke, and at once came Dawn on her golden high throne-seat.
Then there came near to them Menelaus, good at the war-cry,
risen up from his bed, from the side of fair-haired Helen.
And when the dear son of Odysseus became aware of him,
hastily round his flesh he drew his gleaming tunic,
and cast a great cloak over the shoulders sturdy and broad of
the young prince, then went outside; and standing close by him,
Telemachus, dear son of godlike Odysseus, addressed him:
“Son of Atreus, Menelaus, Zeus-nurtured shepherd of peoples,
send me away now at last to the land of my own dear fathers;
for already my heart within me longs to be going homeward.”
Then in answer to him spoke Menelaus, good at the war-cry:
“Telemachus, I for my part will not detain you much longer
here, when you are desiring return; and I would blame another
host as well, who should cherish too much or else should hate too much.
Better are all things measured aright and held in due balance.
Just as bad is the man who urges away an unwilling
guest, as the man who restrains one who hastens and longs to be leaving.
One must love the guest while present, and send him when he is willing.
But remain until I set the gifts in the chariot after bringing
beautiful things, so your own eyes may see them, and I tell the women
to prepare in the hall a meal from the abundance within us.
This is at once both honor and shining grace and advantage,
when men have dined and then set out over the boundless broad earth-way.
But if you wish to be guided through Hellas and midmost Argos,
so that I may myself go with you, and I will yoke horses for you,
guiding you on through the cities of men; and no one among them
will send us away with empty hands, but each will give something
for us to carry away, some tripod of well-burnished bronze there,
or some cauldron, or else a pair of mules, or a gold drinking-cup.”
Then in reply spoke to him clear-headed princely Telemachus:
“Menelaus, son of Atreus, Zeus-nurtured shepherd of peoples,
I desire now at once to go back home to our own country;
for when I came away, I left no guard there behind me
watching my property, lest while I seek my godlike father
I myself may perish, or some fine treasure be lost from my halls.”
But when war-shouting Menelaus had heard what he said there,
at once he gave command to his wife and the serving women
to prepare in the hall a meal from the abundance within them.
And near at hand there came Eteoneus, Boethous’ offspring,
rising up from his bed, since he lived not far from the house there;
him war-shouting Menelaus ordered then to kindle fire
and to roast cuts of meat; and he obeyed when he had heard him.
But he himself went down to the fragrant treasure-chamber,
not all alone, for Helen went with him, and Megapenthes.
But when they had arrived where the precious treasures were lying,
then the son of Atreus lifted a cup with handles on both sides,
and he told his son Megapenthes to carry a mixing-bowl,
one made of silver; and Helen stood beside the great coffers,
where the robes lay for her, all richly embroidered, her own work.
Then Helen, shining among women, lifted one of these from them,
that one which was loveliest in figured design and the largest;
and it shone like a star; it was laid beneath all of the others.
Then they set out and went back through the house, until they reached
Telemachus; and fair-haired Menelaus spoke to him, saying:
“Telemachus, may Zeus bring to fulfillment your homecoming,
just as your own heart longs for it, the loud-thundering consort of Hera.
And of the gifts, whatever lie stored as treasures within my house here,
I will give what is fairest and held in the highest honor.
I will give you a skillfully wrought mixing-bowl; it is silver
all of it, and with gold are the rims completed upon it;
and it is work of Hephaestus; and the splendid hero Phaedimus,
king of the Sidonians, gave it, when in his own house
he gave me shelter returning; and this I desire to bestow on you.”
So he spoke, and the hero son of Atreus placed in his hands there
the two-handled cup; and then the shining bowl was carried
by strong Megapenthes and set down there before him,
silver and bright; and Helen of the beautiful cheeks stood beside him,
holding the robe in her hands, and she spoke a word and addressed him:
“I too, dear child, now give you this gift from my own keeping,
for a remembrance of Helen’s hands, against the longed-for day of marriage,
for your bride to wear; till then let it lie with your dear mother
there in the hall. And may you come with joy and reach your homeland,
both your well-built house and the soil of your fathers’ country.”
So she spoke and placed it into his hands, and he received it gladly.
Then the hero Peisistratus took the gifts and he placed them
in the chariot-basket, and marveled at all in his spirit.
Then fair-haired Menelaus led them both on into the house there,
and they sat down thereafter on chairs and on polished benches.
Then a handmaid poured water upon their hands from a pitcher,
fair and golden, holding it over a silver basin
for them to wash, and beside them she drew up a polished table.
Then the grave housekeeper brought bread and set it before them,
laying on many good things, giving freely out of the stored food;
and nearby Boethous’ son carved the meat and divided portions;
and the son of glorious Menelaus poured out the wine there.
Then to the good things set out and prepared they reached with their hands.
But when they had cast from them the desire for drink and for eating,
then indeed Telemachus and the glorious son of great Nestor
yoked the horses and climbed to the richly inlaid chariot,
and they drove from the forecourt and echoing colonnade outward.
And after them came forth the son of Atreus, fair-haired Menelaus,
holding within his right hand the honey-sweet wine for departure,
in a golden cup, so that they might pour and then be going.
And he stood in front of the horses, and giving them charge he addressed them:
“Farewell, young men, and give my greeting to Nestor, the shepherd
of the people; for truly to me he was gentle as father
all through the time in Troy when we sons of Achaea made war there.”
Then in reply spoke to him clear-headed princely Telemachus:
“Surely indeed, Zeus-nurtured one, all this, just as you tell us,
we shall recount when we have arrived. If only in this same manner,
coming back home to Ithaca, I might find Odysseus
there in the house, and tell him that I come from your presence,
having found every kindness, and bringing many fine treasures.”
Even as he was speaking, there flew by a bird on the right hand,
An eagle was bearing a monstrous white goose in his talons,
tame from the yard; and after him men and women were crying.
Then, as he came in near to them, with the people behind him,
off to the right he swept, before the horses in passing.
Seeing the sign, they rejoiced, and the heart in the breast of each warmed there.
Then among them Peisistratus, Nestor’s son, started speaking:
“Consider now, Menelaus, dear child of Zeus, lord of the people,
whether the god has shown this portent to us two, or to you there.”
So he spoke, and war-loving Menelaus pondered within him
how he might answer him rightly, perceiving the due interpretation.
But before him long-robed Helen spoke out and addressed them:
“Hear me now; and I shall prophesy as in my spirit
the immortals cast it, and as I think it will be fulfilled too.
Just as this eagle seized up the goose that was fattened in household,
coming down from the mountain, where his lineage and birthplace are,
so will Odysseus, after enduring much evil and wandering,
come home again and exact his revenge; or perhaps even now he
is at home, and is planting destruction for all of the suitors.”
Then in answer to her spoke clear-headed Telemachus firmly:
“So now may Zeus establish it, the loud-thundering consort of Hera;
then even there I should pray to you just as though to a goddess.”
He spoke, and laid on the horses the lash; and eagerly forward
swiftly they sped through the town and were straining away for the open.
All through the day they shook the yoke that they bore on both shoulders.
Then the sun went down, and all of the roadways were darkened.
They came to Pherae, to Diocles’ dwelling and household,
son of Ortilochus, whom Alpheus begot as his offspring.
There they slept for the night, and he set guest-gifts there before them.
When the young Dawn appeared with her rose-red fingers in morning,
then they yoked up the horses and mounted the patterned chariot,
drove from the gate and the porch with its far-echoing resonance onward.
He touched them with whip as he drove, and the pair flew on with no protest.
Soon thereafter they came to the steep-built citadel of Pylos.
Then Telemachus spoke to the son of Nestor beside him:
“Son of Nestor, how could you fulfill what I ask and have promised?
Truly we boast that we are guest-friends through all generations,
from our fathers’ affection, and also we both are age-fellows.
This very journey besides will bind our thoughts in more concord.
Do not drive me on past my ship, dear child of Zeus, but leave me
there, lest the old man detain me against my will in his household,
eager to give me affection; but I must reach home very swiftly.”
So he spoke, and the son of Nestor considered within his own spirit
how he might best accomplish the thing that was promised, and rightly.
As he pondered, this course seemed to him far better and wiser:
turning the horses toward the swift ship and the beach of the seashore,
there in the stern of the ship he set down the beautiful presents,
clothing and gold, which Menelaus had given to Telemachus.
Then with urging he spoke to him and addressed him in winged words:
“Board now quickly yourself, and command all your comrades beside you,
before I get home and report to the old man all that has happened.
For I know this well in the depths of my heart and my thinking:
such is the force of his spirit, he certainly will not release you.
No, he will come here himself to summon you back, and I tell you
he will not go again empty; he will be angry regardless.”
So he spoke, and drove back the fair-maned horses in haste to
the city of the Pylians, and quickly he came to the household.
Then Telemachus urged on his comrades and gave them his orders:
“Set in order the tackle, my friends, all throughout the black vessel;
let us ourselves embark, so we may accomplish our journey.”
So he spoke, and they listened attentively, and they obeyed him.
Straightway they boarded the ship and sat down upon all the benches.
He meanwhile busied himself, and prayed and sacrificed to Athena
there by the stern of the ship; and near him there came up a stranger,
one from a distant land, fleeing from Argos for killing a man there,
a seer; and by lineage he was descended from Melampus,
who in earlier times had lived in Pylos, mother of sheepflocks,
rich among all the Pylians, dwelling in splendid abundance.
But thereafter he came to another folk, fleeing his fatherland
and great-hearted Neleus, the proudest by far of men living,
who by force was retaining his wealth for a full turning year then.
Meanwhile in Phylacus’ halls that man remained all the while bound
fast in grievous confinement, enduring harsh anguish and suffering,
all for the sake of Neleus’ daughter and blinding delusion,
which on his spirit the dread house-haunting Fury had planted.
Yet even so he escaped his fate, and drove the loud-lowing cattle
out of Phylace to Pylos, and paid back the shameful transgression
done by godlike Neleus, and brought home the woman in marriage
for his brother; but he himself went on to another people,
onward to horse-pasturing Argos; for there it had been his destiny
there to dwell and to rule as lord over many Argives.
There he took him a wife and established a high-roofed dwelling,
and he begot Antiphates and Mantius, stalwart sons both.
Antiphates fathered Oicles, great-hearted in spirit,
and Oicles fathered Amphiaraus, driver of peoples,
him whom Zeus of the aegis loved in his inmost being,
and Apollo as well, with every manner of fondness;
yet he did not attain to the threshold of age, but perished
there in Thebes; and sons were born to him, Alcmaeon, Amphilochus.
Mantius likewise begot Polyphides and also Cleitus;
but indeed gold-throned Dawn carried away noble Cleitus,
for the sake of his beauty, that he might dwell with immortals.
But high-hearted Polyphides Phoebus Apollo appointed
prophet by far the best among mortals, when Amphiaraus died.
He then moved and made home in Hyperesia, angered
there with his father; and dwelling there he gave prophecies to all men.
Then it was this man's son who came near; Theoclymenus
was the name that he bore; and he stood by the side of Telemachus.
He found him pouring libation and making prayer by his swift black ship there,
and calling out to him he addressed him in winged words:
“Friend, since I have found you here in this place making sacrifice,
I beseech you by these offerings here, and then by the god there,
and by your own head too, and the heads of companions who follow:
tell me the truth in answer; do not conceal it from me.
Who are you among men, and from where? Where are your city and parents?”
Then thoughtful Telemachus answered him face to face, saying:
“Then, stranger, I certainly will tell you the strict truth clearly.
I am by race from Ithaca, and my father is Odysseus,
if indeed he once was; but now he has perished in misery.
Therefore now, taking comrades with me and my black vessel,
I came to inquire of my father, so long departed.”
Then godlike Theoclymenus spoke in answer to him:
“So I too have come out from my fatherland, having killed a man,
one of my own blood; and many his brothers and kinsmen
are throughout horse-pasturing Argos, and rule many Achaeans.
From these I am fleeing death and the black doom appointed,
since it is somehow my fate to wander abroad among mortals.
But let me embark on your ship, since I come as suppliant,
lest they kill me; for I think they are pursuing behind me.”
Then thoughtful Telemachus answered him face to face, saying:
“No, I will certainly not drive you, willing, away from the good ship.
Come along; and there you will be welcomed with what we can offer.”
So he spoke, and accepted from him the bronze-shod spear there,
and he stretched it out on the benches of the curved vessel.
Then he himself as well went aboard the seafaring ship there.
In the stern thereafter he sat himself down, and beside him
he seated Theoclymenus; and the crew cast off the stern-cables.
Then Telemachus urged on his comrades and gave them commandment
to set hand to the gear; and swiftly they moved in obedience.
Then they lifted the firwood mast within the hollow midship,
set it upright, and fastened it down with the forestays tightly;
then they hauled up the white sail with well-twisted thongs made of oxhide.
And for them gray-eyed Athena sent a wind from behind them,
strong-blowing, rushing hard through the bright clear air of heaven,
so the ship at full speed might accomplish the salt sea water.
Then they passed by Crouni and Chalcis with beautiful waters.
And the sun sank down, and all the roadways were shadowed.
Then the ship made for Pheae, driven hard by the wind of Zeus there,
and past shining Elis, where the Epeians hold their dominion.
From there again he drove her on toward the outlying islands,
pondering whether he might escape from death, or be taken.
Meanwhile within the hut sat Odysseus and the noble swineherd,
taking supper; and beside them the other men supped as well there.
But when they had put from them the desire of drink and of eating,
then Odysseus spoke among them, to test the swineherd's spirit,
whether he still would kindly invite him to stay and remain there
in the farmstead itself, or else would urge him cityward onward:
“Hear me now, Eumaeus, and all the rest of my comrades.
At dawn I desire to go toward the city and beg there,
so that I may not wear you down and burden your companions.
But advise me well, and furnish a noble guide to go with me,
one who will lead me there; and then through the town by necessity
I myself will wander, if anyone offers a cup and a morsel.
And going then to the house of godlike lord Odysseus,
I might tell my tidings to circumspect wise Penelope,
and I might mix with the proud and overbearing suitors,
if they would give me a meal, with countless good things in abundance.
Quickly and well I would do among them whatever they wished done.
For I will tell you this, and do you attend and listen:
by grace of Hermes the guide, who upon the endeavors
of all mortal men bestows both favor and glory in labor,
No other mortal in service with me could contend or dispute there,
whether in kindling a fire with skill or in cleaving dry firewood,
carving the meat and roasting it well and pouring the wine out,
all the such tasks that lesser men's hands run by for the noble.”
Then in great indignation you answered him, Eumaeus the swineherd:
“Ah me, stranger, what sort of a thought has arisen within you?
Surely you yearn altogether to perish there on the instant,
if indeed you desire to go down into that throng of the suitors,
whose outrage and violent force rise up to the iron heaven.
The serving-men there are not in the least of the sort that you are,
but they are young men, well clothed about in mantles and tunics,
always sleek in the hair, and their faces are handsome to look on:
these are the men who attend them; and polished tables before them
heavily sag with bread and with meats and with wine in abundance.
No, but remain here; for no one is vexed by your presence among us,
neither I nor any other companion of mine who is with me.
But when the dear son of Odysseus comes here among us,
he himself will put on you a mantle and tunic for clothing,
and will send you wherever your heart and spirit command you.”
Then resourceful Odysseus, who had endured much, answered him:
“Would that thus, Eumaeus, you might be dear to father Zeus's heart
as you are dear to mine, since you stopped my wandering and hardship.
For there is nothing for mortals more wretched than aimless wandering;
yet for the sake of the cursed belly men suffer afflictions,
any man whom wandering has reached, and calamity, sorrow, and anguish.
But now, since you urge me to stay here and await that young master,
come then, tell me now of the mother of godlike Odysseus,
and his father too, whom he left as he went on the threshold of old age:
are they still living somewhere beneath the beams of the sunlight,
or are they dead already and in the house of Hades?”
Then again the swineherd replied to him, the captain of people:
“Then, stranger, I certainly will tell you the whole truth exactly.
Laertes still is alive, but always he prays unto Zeus there
that the life in his limbs may waste away in his halls and be ended.
For in terrible measure he mourns for his son who is absent,
and for his wise wedded wife, whose death beyond all things
struck him with grief and laid him low in harsh and pitiless old age.
She indeed perished in sorrowing after her glorious son there,
by a most wretched death; may no one who here is my loved friend
die in such fashion, if he dwells here and shows me kindness.
So long as that lady still lived, though grieving unceasingly,
even so it was dear to my heart to inquire and to ask of her,
since she herself had reared me along with long-robed Ctimene,
her stately daughter, the youngest by far of the children she bore.
Along with her I was nourished, and she honored me little the less so.
But when the two of us both came to lovely youth's full measure,
then they gave her to Same in marriage and took countless gifts for her,
while me the lady herself, when she clothed me in mantle and tunic,
beautiful garments to wear, and gave me sandals under my feet there,
sent out to the farm; and she loved me still more in her inmost heart.
But now I am deprived of all these things; yet for me on my labor
blessed gods make increase in the work wherein I continue.
From that I have eaten and drunk and given to reverend persons.
But from my mistress now there is no kindly thing to be heard there,
neither a word nor a deed, since evil has fallen upon the household,
these overweening men; and greatly the servants all miss it,
speaking before their mistress and learning of each thing that happens,
and eating and drinking, and after that carrying something away
out to the farm, such things as always gladden the spirit of bondmen.”
Then Odysseus of many devices answered him, saying:
“Ah, surely, Eumaeus, swineherd, while still but exceedingly little,
far indeed were you driven astray from your fatherland and your parents.
But come, tell me this, and recount it to me truly and clearly:
was the broad-wayed city of men laid waste and plundered,
where your father had dwelt and your honored mother beside him,
or were you all alone by your sheep or away by your cattle
when hostile men seized you and took you away in their vessels
to the house of this man here, and he paid them a worthy price for you?”
Then again the swineherd replied to him, the captain of people:
“Stranger, since truly you ask me these things and seek to inquire of them,
now in silence attend and take your delight, and drink of the wine there
sitting at ease. These nights are beyond all telling in number.
There is a time for sleeping, and time to enjoy hearing a story;
there is no need for you to lie down before the due hour; too much sleep tires.
And for the rest, whichever man's own heart and spirit command him,
let him go out and sleep; and together with dawn as it appears there,
after breakfast let him go with our master's swine in attendance.
But we two, here in the hut, while drinking and sharing our supper,
shall take delight in each other's grievous sorrows and hardships,
calling them back; for afterward a man finds pleasure in sufferings,
when a man has endured very much and has wandered through much sorrow.
This I will tell you now, the thing that you ask and inquire of.
There is an island called Syrie, if ever you have heard of it,
lying above Ortygia, there where the sun has its turnings.
It is not overpeopled so much, but the land itself is noble,
good for the grazing of cattle, good for sheep, rich in wine, rich in wheatfields.
Hunger does not ever come in among all the people there, nor any
other disease, that hateful thing, befalls unhappy mortals.
But whenever the tribes of men throughout the city grow old there,
then comes Apollo the silver-bowed, with Artemis beside him,
and with his gentle shafts he visits and quietly kills them.
There are two cities there, and all things have been divided between them;
and over both of the cities my own dear father was reigning,
Ctesius, son of Ormenus, a man like the deathless immortals.
There came Phoenician men to that place, men famous for shipcraft,
cheats and tricksters, bringing innumerable trinkets in a black ship.
In the house of my father there was a Phoenician woman,
beautiful, tall, and skilled in splendid work with her hands.
Her the Phoenicians, masters of many deceits, led astray there.
While she was washing clothes by the hollow ship, one of them first
lay down with her in love; and that thing confuses the spirit
even in women, and even one who is diligent in labor.
Then after this he asked her who she was and whence she had come there.
She at once pointed out the high-roofed house of my father:
“I declare that I come from Sidon, rich in bronze and abundance,
and I am daughter of Arybas, a man who is wealthy beyond measure.
But Taphian men, pirates and raiders, seized hold of me
as I came from the fields, and brought me over the water hither
to this man's house and home; and he gave a fitting price for me.”
Then the man who had secretly lain with her answered her saying:
“Would you indeed now come back home again in our company,
so that you may see your father's and mother's high-roofed dwelling,
and see them too? For they still live and are called wealthy.”
Then in return the woman replied and answered him saying:
“Yes, that indeed could be, if only you sailors were willing
to bind yourselves under oath to carry me home without harm done.”
So she spoke, and all of them swore as she had commanded.
But when they had sworn it and brought the oath to fulfillment,
then among them again the woman spoke and answered them saying:
“Now keep silent, and let not one of the comrades among you
speak any word to me if he should meet me out in the roadway
or perhaps by the spring, lest someone go to the house and tell it
to the old man, and he in suspicion should bind me tightly
fast in a grievous bond, and devise destruction against you.
But hold this word in your hearts, and hurry the purchase of cargo.
Yet when at last your ship has become filled full of provisions,
then let a message come to me quickly there in the house-place.
For I will bring gold also, whatever may come to my hands then.
And I could gladly give another fare besides this as well:
I am nurse to the child of this lordly man here in the halls,
a shrewd little fellow indeed, who runs out of doors beside me.
I could bring him on board of the ship, and he for your profit
would fetch you a price beyond measure wherever you reach alien peoples.”
So she spoke, and after speaking went away to the beautiful dwelling.
They, remaining there among us for the full course of a year then,
traded in many goods and amassed much wealth in their hollow ship.
But when at last their hollow ship was laden to sail homeward,
then indeed they sent a messenger, one to inform the woman.
There came a man to the house of my father, skilled in many wiles,
carrying a golden necklace inlaid with bits of amber.
There in the hall the serving-women and my honored mother
handled it over and over in their hands and gazed with their eyes on it,
offering a price; and he nodded in silence to the woman.
Then after making the sign he had gone away to the hollow ship,
and she took me by the hand and led me out from the house-doors.
There in the forecourt she found both cups and tables together
left by the men at the feast who attended around my father.
They had gone away to the meeting-seats and the talk of the people.
Quickly she hid three fine cups in the fold of her bosom
and carried them out; and I followed with childish unknowing.
Then the sun sank down, and all of the streets were overshadowed.
We came very quickly, hurrying on, to the famous harbor,
where the swift seafaring ship of the Phoenician sailors was lying.
Then they embarked and sailed on over the watery pathways,
we two having gone on board; and Zeus sent forth them a fair wind.
For six days alike we sailed both through the nights and the daytime.
But when at last the son of Cronos had brought the seventh day on,
then Artemis, delighting in arrows, struck down that woman,
and she fell with a thump in the bilge like a diving sea-gull.
Then they cast her away overboard, for seals and fishes to ravage.
they cast her out; but I was left there, heart-sick in my affliction.
Then the wind and the water together bore them on to Ithaca,
where Laertes purchased me there with goods from his own keeping.
Thus it was I myself first saw this country here with my own eyes.”
Then resourceful Odysseus, born of Zeus, answered him, saying:
“Eumaeus, truly indeed you have stirred the heart in my bosom,
telling of each of these things, all the griefs your spirit has suffered.
Yet surely Zeus set some good thing beside this evil for you,
since after much hardship you came to the house of a gentle
man, one who provides you with food and with drink in abundance,
tenderly; and you live a good life; but I on the other hand,
after much roaming through cities of mortal men, have come here.”
Thus they in this fashion addressed one another with speeches,
and they lay down to sleep for no very long time, but briefly;
for quickly Dawn on her beautiful throne came over them. On the mainland
the companions of Telemachus loosened the sails, and they lowered
the mast in haste, and with oars drew the ship on into the harbor;
out they cast mooring-stones, and fastened the stern-cables firmly;
and they themselves stepped out on the wash of the surf of the seashore,
and they made ready a meal, and mixed the flaming wine in the bowl there.
But when they had put from them the desire for drink and for eating,
then wise Telemachus there among them began with his speaking:
“Now drive the black ship onward, all of you, into the city;
but I shall go on to the fields and go to the herdsmen.
In the evening I shall come down to the town, when I have inspected
all my work; and at dawn I shall set before you for your journey
a noble feast of meats and of sweet delightful wine there.”
Then godlike Theoclymenus answered and spoke to him, saying:
“But where shall I go, dear child? To whose house shall I come now,
of the men who hold lordship throughout rugged Ithaca’s island?
Shall I go straight to your mother’s house, and to your own dwelling?”
Then wise Telemachus answered him directly and said this:
“At another time I surely would bid you go to our household;
for there is no lack of guest-gifts there; but for you it is better
otherwise, since I shall be away, and my mother will not see you.
For she does not often appear in the house before the suitors;
rather apart from them in the upper room she weaves at her loom there.
But I shall point out another man to you, one you may visit:
Eurymachus, the splendid son of the prudent Polybus,
whom now the men of Ithaca look upon as if on a god there.
For he is by far the foremost man, and most greatly is eager
to marry my mother and take the honor of noble Odysseus.
Yet Zeus Olympian knows it, dwelling up in the bright aether,
whether for them before marriage he will accomplish an evil day.”
So he spoke, and there flew past on the right hand a bird of omen,
a hawk, swift messenger of Apollo; within his talons
he held a dove, and he tore it, and scattered the feathers earthward
down to the ground between the ship and Telemachus himself there.
Then Theoclymenus called him apart and away from his comrades,
and clasped his hand in his own, and spoke a word and addressed him:
“Telemachus, not without god was this bird on the right hand flying;
for I knew, when I looked at him full-face, he was a true omen.
There is no lineage other than yours more kingly in Ithaca;
no, but your house shall always be strong and hold power forever.”
Then wise Telemachus answered him directly and said this:
“If only, stranger, this word of yours might be brought to fulfillment;
then very soon you would know both my friendship and many fine presents
given by me, so that anyone meeting you would call you blessed.”
So he spoke, and addressed Piraeus, his faithful companion:
“Piraeus, son of Clytius, since in all other matters most fully
you obey me among my companions who went with me to Pylos,
now too take this stranger and lead him into your own dwelling,
and kindly cherish and honor him there until I shall come back.”
Then Piraeus, renowned for the spear, answered him directly:
“Telemachus, even if you should remain here a very long season,
I shall care for this man, and no guest-right shall be lacking to him.”
So he spoke, and went aboard the ship, and ordered his comrades
to embark there themselves and to loosen the stern-cables from her.
Then they quickly went on board and sat themselves down by the thole-pins.
But Telemachus bound his beautiful sandals under his feet there,
and took up his mighty spear from the deck of the ship, bronze-pointed,
keen with sharp bronze; and the others cast off the stern-cables from her.
They, after pushing away, sailed onward toward the city, as ordered
by Telemachus, dear son of godlike great Odysseus.
But him his feet bore swiftly striding on, until he reached the courtyard
where his swine were, past counting, and there by them was the swineherd,
sleeping, a worthy man, with a kindly heart toward his masters.
