The Odyssey — Book 5

Calypso’s island: the raft, Poseidon’s storm, the landing on Scheria.

Dawn from the bed where she rested beside the lordly Tithonus
rose, bearing light to the gods everlasting and mortal humanity.
Gods were assembling and taking their seats in the place of their council,
Zeus high-thundering among them, whose power is greatest of all gods.
There gray-eyed Athena recounted the many cares of Odysseus,
thinking of him, for it grieved her he stayed in the house of the sea nymph:
“Father Zeus, and you blessed immortals who live without dying,
never again let a scepter-bearing king be gentle and kindly,
never let one in his heart understand the appropriate justice;
let him be harsh in his dealings instead and commit every outrage,
since not one of the people remembers the godlike Odysseus,
subjects he governed as king, though he was as gentle as father.
Now on an island he lies and endures overpowering sorrows,
there in the halls of Calypso the nymph, who continues to hold him
forcibly there, and he cannot return to the land of his fathers,
since no ships with their oars are beside him and no companions
able to carry him over the broad and enormous back of the sea-way.
Now there are men who intend to murder his well-beloved son
during his homeward journey; he sailed out in search of his father,
going to sacred Pylos and shining Lacedaemon.”
Then cloud-gathering Zeus made answer and spoke to Athena:
“Child of my blood, what word has escaped from the fence of your tooth-row?
Did you yourself not frame this counsel and plan it beforehand,
how on returning Odysseus should punish the men for their outrage?
Guide young Telemachus now with your skill, for you have the power,
so he returns to the land of his fathers untouched by affliction,
while in their vessel the suitors return with no deed accomplished.”
Thus having spoken, he turned to the well-loved son Hermes and told him:
“Hermes, since you are messenger also in all other matters,
tell to the nymph with the beautiful hair our unalterable counsel:
steadfast Odysseus now shall return from his long deprivation,
having no escort of gods everlasting or mortal humanity.
Suffering pain on a raft made of timbers securely united,
he on the twentieth day shall arrive at the rich land Scheria,
country of godlike Phaeacians, whose lineage is close to immortals.
They in the depth of their hearts shall honor the man like a god there,
send him away in a ship to the well-loved land of his fathers,
giving him clothing abundant and bronze and gold for his treasure,
more than Odysseus ever had carried away from the Trojan
country if safe he had come with the fair share allotted in plunder.
So it is fated for him to behold his friends and arrive at
home with its high-built roof and the country and land of his fathers.”
Thus did he speak, and the guide who had slaughtered Argus obeyed him.
Straightway under his feet he fastened the beautiful sandals,
golden and deathless, that carry him over the breadth of the water,
also the measureless land, with the rushing and breath of the windstorm.
Then he took hold of the wand with which he enchants human eyelids,
those he desires, and awakens again other men from their sleeping.
Holding it firmly, the powerful slaughterer of Argus was flying.
Down on Pieria first he alighted, then dropped to the sea-way,
skimming along on the surface of waves in the form of a shearwater,
one that across the tremendous troughs of the desolate sea-way
hunts for the fish and repeatedly wets its wings in the salt brine.
Such was the manner that Hermes rode over crowding wave-crests.
Yet when he reached that faraway island and came to its shore there,
out from the violet-colored water he stepped onto dry land,
onward he went till he came to the mighty cave where the goddess
nymph with the beautiful hair made her dwelling, and found her within it.
There on the hearth an enormous fire was blazing, and fragrance
carried afar from the burning and split cedar wood and the citron,
filling the island. Within, the goddess sang beautifully, moving
back and forth by the loom as she wove with a shuttle of gold-work.
High and luxuriant forest had grown all around the great cavern:
alder and black-colored poplar and sweet-scented cypress together.
There the long-winged birds of the air were accustomed to roosting,
little horned owls and hawks and the crows of the sea with long tongues there,
all who continually take their employment and food from the water.
Over the hollow cave a flourishing vine had been trained there,
grown to its prime and abundantly heavy with clusters of grapes now.
Four flowing springs in a row poured out their crystalline water,
close to each other, though each was directed along its own pathway.
Soft-colored meadows of violets and wild celery round them
blossomed; and even a god everlasting arriving among them
would look on in astonishment there and be gladdened in spirit.
There stood the guide who had slaughtered Argus and gazed in amazement.
Then, when his heart had been filled with delight in the whole of the vision,
straightway into the broad cave he entered; and radiant Calypso,
shining among the goddesses, knew who he was when she saw him.
Gods everlasting are never unknown to each other in meeting,
even if one makes his dwelling afar from the rest of immortals.
Yet he did not discover the great-hearted lord Odysseus
there, for the man sat weeping as always he sat on the seashore,
rending the heart in his bosom with tears and with groaning and sorrow,
gazing across the desolate sea while the tears still fell downward.
Radiant Calypso, the goddess, inquired of Hermes and asked him,
seating him there in a chair that was beautifully bright in its shining:
“Why have you come to me, Hermes who carries the gold wand, my honored
guest and beloved? You never before were accustomed to visit.
Tell what you hold in your mind, for my heart is determined to do it,
if I have power to do it, and if it is able to be done.
Yet come inside in the first place and let me set food there before you.”
Thus having spoken, the goddess drew up a table beside him,
heaping ambrosia over it, mixing the red-colored nectar.
Then the guide and the slaughterer of Argus was drinking and eating.
After the god had partaken of food and encouraged his spirit,
then he replied to the goddess in words and gave answer directly:
“Goddess, you ask me, a god, why I come, and I shall not conceal it;
all I shall tell you in truth, since you have commanded the answer.
Zeus ordered me to come here, though I had no desire for the journey.
Who by his choice would cross such a measureless distance of salt sea,
past all description, where no mortal city is near us to offer
either the victims that please all the gods or appropriate hecatombs?
Yet no other god can evade or bring to frustration
any intention of Zeus who possesses and carries the aegis.
He says a man lives beside you, the most wretched warrior
out of the heroes who fought nine years round Priam’s city,
sacked it at last in the tenth and departed to sail for his homeland.
Yet on the homeward journey they sinned against goddess Athena,
who stirred a terrible wind and enormous waves of the sea-way.
There all the rest of his excellent traveling comrades were ruined,
while to this island the wind and the wave carried only Odysseus.
Zeus now commands you to send that man on his journey, and quickly.
It is not fated for him to die here afar from his people;
still it is fated for him to behold his friends and arrive at
home with its high-built roof and the country and land of his fathers.”
Thus did he speak, and the radiant goddess Calypso was trembling.
Raising her voice, she addressed him, and these words took wing as she uttered:
“Pitiless gods, more jealous than every being beside you!
You feel resentment when goddesses openly sleep beside mortal
men, if a goddess should take one to be her beloved husband.
So when the rose-fingered Dawn took Orion to be her companion,
you who are gods living free of affliction resented her pleasure,
till in Ortygia the chaste gold-throned goddess Artemis found him,
coming against him with gentle arrows and killing him swiftly.
So when Demeter the goddess with beautiful hair obeyed her
heart and in love lay down by Iasion there in the furrow,
fallow ground plowed three times, it was not long hidden from great Zeus,
who with a cast of the glittering lightning destroyed him completely.
So now, gods everlasting, you grudge me a mortal companion.
I was the one who delivered him, riding astride of the keel there,
after the lightning of Zeus had struck his swift-running vessel,
splitting it there in the midst of the sea with its wine-colored water.
There all the rest of his excellent traveling comrades were ruined,
while to this island the wind and the wave carried only Odysseus.
I gave him love and nourishment there, and I promised to make him
deathless and free from the withering touch of old age all his lifetime.
Yet no other god can evade or bring to frustration
any intention of Zeus who possesses and carries the aegis.
Let the man go, if Zeus now urges and gives the commandment,
over the desolate sea; but I shall not be his conveyor.
No ships with their oars are beside me and no companions
able to carry him over the broad and enormous back of the sea-way.
Yet with a willing heart I shall counsel him, hiding no knowledge,
so he returns to the land of his fathers untouched by affliction.”
Then the guide and the slaughterer of Argus replied to the goddess:
“Send him away in this manner, and guard against angering great Zeus,
lest he should turn afterward in his wrath and bring punishment on you.”
Thus having spoken, the powerful slaughterer of Argus departed.
Then the queenly nymph went seeking the great-hearted lord Odysseus,
once she had heard and attended the messenger sent her from great Zeus.
There on the shore she found him; his eyes were continually tearful,
never were dry, while the sweetness of life kept draining away in
grief for the homeward return, since the nymph no longer could please him.
True, in the nighttime he slept by her side, for she forced him to do so,
there in the hollow caves, an unwilling man by a willing goddess;
yet in the daytime he sat on the rocks and the beaches around them,
rending the heart in his bosom with tears and with groaning and sorrow,
gazing across the desolate sea while the tears still fell downward.
Standing beside him, the radiant goddess addressed him and told him:
“Sorrowful man, do not grieve here longer or let your existence
waste itself further away; I am ready entirely to send you.
Come now, cut long timbers and fasten with bronze the broad structure
of a raft, and construct on its surface a high-rising half-deck,
so it may carry you over the mist-covered face of the sea-way.
Bread I shall set in the vessel and water and red-colored wine there,
all to your heart’s satisfaction, to keep off the pain of your hunger.
Clothing I give you and send an appropriate wind to your sternward,
so you return to the land of your fathers untouched by affliction,
if this is willed by the gods everlasting who govern broad heaven,
they who in purpose and action are stronger and mightier than I.”
Thus did she speak, and the steadfast and noble Odysseus trembled.
Raising his voice, he addressed her, and these words took wing as he uttered:
“Goddess, you plan something else in this place, not my safe expedition,
telling me I should cross on a raft the tremendous gulf of the sea-way,
terrible, painful, which even the swift and beautifully fitted ships do not
cross, though they take great delight in a favoring wind sent by great Zeus.
Never shall I set foot on a raft if you are unwilling,
not till you bring yourself, goddess, to swear the tremendous oath to me
you do not plan any other affliction or evil against me.”
Thus did he speak, and the radiant goddess Calypso was smiling.
Stroking him there with her hand, she addressed him aloud by his name there:
“Truly you are a deceiver and never unpracticed in cunning,
since you considered and spoke such a careful expression before me.
Witness it now, O Earth and the measureless Heaven above us,
also the downward-dripping water of Styx, the most solemn
oath and the most to be dreaded by gods everlasting in swearing:
I do not plan any other affliction or evil against you.
No, I am thinking and giving the counsel that I would determine
there for myself if a similar need should arise and compel me.
Honest and righteous the mind in my bosom, and never a heart made
out of implacable iron is mine; it understands pity.”
Thus having spoken, the radiant goddess proceeded before him
rapidly, while in the steps of the goddess he followed her onward.
Both then entered the hollow cave, both goddess and mortal.
He sat down on the chair where Hermes had lately been sitting,
while every kind of the food that mortal humanity eats there
also the drink was brought by the nymph and positioned before him.
She took a seat directly across from the godlike Odysseus;
servants set nectar and heavenly food at the side of the goddess.
Both reached their hands to the excellent food that was ready before them.
Then, when desire for food and for drinking was put from their bodies,
radiant Calypso the goddess began to address lord Odysseus:
“Zeus-born Laertes’ son, resourceful and noble Odysseus,
so you now wish to depart for the well-loved land of your fathers,
straightway, this moment? Depart, and may joy go beside you regardless.
Yet if you knew in the depth of your heart what abundance of sorrow
fate has appointed for you ere you come to the land of your fathers,
you would remain here with me and would keep this house, being deathless,
even although you long every day to behold your own consort,
she for whose presence you ache with a constant desire in your lifetime.
Yet I declare I am neither inferior to her in appearance
nor in the stature I carry, since never is it appropriate
mortal women compete with immortals in bodily form or in beauty.”
Then the resourceful Odysseus answered the goddess and told her:
“Goddess and queen, do not now be angry with me; I understand it.
Well do I know that the thoughtful and steadfast Penelope does not
equal your stature or beauty to look on, but is far beneath you,
since she is mortal and you are immortal and free of all aging.
Still I desire and I long every day of my whole life to travel
homeward and finally look on the day of my homeward returning.
If some god on the wine-colored sea should again bring me shipwreck,
still I shall bear it, the heart in my bosom experienced in sorrow.
Much I have suffered already and labored in waves and in battle;
let this affliction be added to all the afflictions that came first.”
Thus he spoke, while the sun sank down and the twilight descended.
Into the innermost hollow of cavern the two then proceeded,
taking delight in the pleasure of love and remaining together.
When Dawn in her earliness rose with her rose-colored fingers,
straightway the lord Odysseus clothed himself in mantle and tunic.
She, the divine nymph, put on a silvery mantle around her,
finely and gracefully woven, and fastened around her a beautiful
girdle of gold, then covered the crown of her head with a veil there.
Then she considered the sending away of the great Odysseus.
Into his palms she fitted a massive ax for his labor,
fashioned of bronze and sharpened alike on each side of the ax head,
fitted with beautiful handle of olive wood, solid and well made.
Then she presented a smoothly polished adze and conducted
him to the island’s furthest extreme, where the tallest trees flourished:
alder and black-colored poplar and fir trees touching the heavens,
long ago dried and seasoned, and light for his sailing on water.
After she showed him the place where all of the tallest trees flourished,
radiant Calypso returned to her home and abandoned him working.
He began cutting the timber, and work went swiftly before him.
Twenty trees altogether he felled, then trimmed with the bronze blade,
skillfully smoothed them all and made straight by the line of the builder.
Meanwhile radiant Calypso the goddess brought augers before him;
through every timber he bored and fitted one closely to other,
fastening all with the mortising craft and the pegs of the builder.
Wide as the curving hull of a broad and burdened merchantman
measured by one who is thoroughly skilled in the craft of construction,
so broadly did Odysseus make and construct the raft body.
Half-decks he set in their place and attached to the close-fitted cross ribs,
finishing all with the long-running planks that would serve as the gunwales.
Therein he fashioned a mast and a yard that was fitted upon it;
also he fashioned a steering oar that would hold to the course there.
All from the stern to the bow he surrounded with braided willow
barriers warding the wave and abundant brush used for ballast.
Meanwhile radiant Calypso brought cloth for the making of sailcloth,
which he constructed as well with the skill and the craft he possessed there,
fastening braces and halyards and sheets in their places securely.
Then with his levers he hauled the raft to the glittering salt sea.
This was the fourth day, and all of the work had been brought to completion.
There on the fifth day radiant Calypso dispatched him,
bathing his body and clothing him there in sweet-smelling garments.
One skin dark with the wine the goddess provided aboard it,
also another and greater for water, provisions in leather
sack, and abundant comforting meats for the wearisome journey.
Then she provided a wind blowing harmless and warm from behind him.
Glad in the wind, the noble Odysseus spread out the sailcloth,
skillfully guiding the raft with the steering oar in his two hands,
seated; and never did sleep come down on his eyes for the nighttime,
watching the Pleiades, watching Boötes late in his setting,
watching the Bear that is known to humanity also as Wagon,
turning in place and continually watching the hunter Orion,
only the starry formation that never bathes in the ocean.
Radiant Calypso the goddess had given him careful instruction
he should keep this on the left of his hand while he traveled the sea-way.
Seventeen days he continued to sail, making way over water.
Then on the eighteenth day the shadowy mountains appeared there,
mountains of the Phaeacian country, the part that was closest;
like a round shield they appeared to him over the mist-covered sea-way.
Yet the strong shaker of earth, returning from Ethiopians,
saw him from far off out of the mountains of Solyma; plainly
visible there he sailed, and the god grew angrier in spirit.
Shaking his head, he addressed his own heart and considered the matter:
“Curse it! The gods have surely revised their intentions concerning
lord Odysseus while I remained with the Ethiopians.
Here he is close to the Phaeacian country where fate has appointed
he shall escape from the final noose of the pain that has bound him.
Still I declare I shall drive him deep enough into affliction.”
Thus having spoken, he gathered the clouds and stirred up the sea-way,
grasping his trident; and every squall of the winds he awakened,
every direction, and covered both land and the sea with the storm cloud;
night rose suddenly upward and outward from heaven’s expanses.
East Wind and South Wind fell on him together and hard-blowing West Wind,
also the clear-born North Wind rolling a mountainous wave there.
Then were Odysseus’ knees unstrung and the heart in his body;
deeply disturbed, he addressed his own great-hearted spirit and told it:
“Sorrowful man that I am! What happens to me at the ending?
Now I am frightened the goddess revealed everything without error,
saying that I on the sea, ere I came to the land of my fathers,
must fill my measure of pains, and it all is coming to fullness.
See how Zeus crowns all of the breadth of the heaven with storm cloud,
stirring the sea, while the squalls of the whole of the winds are assailing,
every direction; and now my destruction is altogether certain.
Three times blessed were the Danaans, four times blessed, who were slaughtered
in those years in broad Troy, doing kindness to Atreus’ two sons!
Would that I too had died there and met my allotted destruction,
there on the day when innumerable Trojans were casting
bronze-headed spears at my body above the dead offspring of Peleus.
Then I had won full rites for my death and Achaeans had carried my glory;
now it is fated I die by a miserable form of destruction.”
Just as he spoke, an enormous wave came rushing from high up,
terribly driving upon him and whirling the raft in a circle.
Far from the raft he was thrown, and the steering oar from his fingers
flew, while the mast was snapped in the middle by terrible tempest,
winds from every direction converging and striking together;
far off into the water the sail and the yard were carried.
Long underneath the water the wave held the suffering hero;
swiftly he could not arise from beneath the enormous wave’s downrush,
since he was burdened with clothes that the radiant Calypso had given.
Yet in the end he rose and spat from his mouth bitter salt brine,
streaming abundantly down from the crown of his head in great torrents.
Yet even so, though exhausted, he never forgot the raft body;
lunging amid the waves, he caught hold of its timbers and mounted,
sitting himself in the midst and evading the ending of death there.
Great waves carried it here and there in the force of the current.
Just as the northern wind in the autumn bears thistledown over
open plains, while the clusters are clinging securely together,
so the winds carried it here and there over open seawater.
Now the South Wind tossed it across to the North Wind to carry,
now in his turn East Wind surrendered the raft to the West Wind.
Then she perceived him, the beautiful-ankled daughter of Cadmus,
Ino the White Goddess, once a mortal with mortal expression,
now in the depths of the salt sea sharing the honor of godhead.
She took pity on lord Odysseus, driven and worn by affliction;
taking the form of a shearwater, up from the sea she came flying,
perched on the close-fitted raft and addressed him and gave him instruction:
“Sorrowful man, why has earth-shaking lord Poseidon become so
terribly hostile to you, that he plants such a harvest of evil?
Still he shall not destroy you, although his fury is raging.
Do as I tell you exactly, for you do not seem without wisdom.
Strip off the clothing you wear and abandon the raft to the windstorm;
strike out swimming by force of your hands on the homeward return to
land of Phaeacians, where it is fated you flee from destruction.
Here, spread this deathless veil underneath the breadth of your chest now.
It is immortal; you need not fear any pain or destruction.
Yet at the moment your hands have taken a hold upon dry land,
loosen it once more and cast it afar in the wine-colored sea-way,
far from the land, and turn your face in the opposite quarter.”
Thus having spoken, the goddess presented the veil to Odysseus;
then she herself sank back underneath the turbulent sea swell,
taking the form of a shearwater; dark-colored waves closed above her.
Then the steadfast and noble Odysseus thought of the matter;
deeply disturbed, he addressed his own great-hearted spirit and told it:
“Sorrow! I fear some immortal is weaving another deception,
telling me I must leave my raft and surrender it wholly.
No, I shall not yet obey, for afar with my own eyes
I saw the land where the goddess declared that my refuge awaited.
This I shall do, since it seems in my mind to be greatly the best thing:
while all the timbers continue to hold in the fastenings firmly,
so long I stay on the raft and endure the afflictions upon it;
yet at the moment the wave has broken the raft into pieces,
then I shall swim, since no better counsel appears to my thinking.”
While in the depth of his mind and his spirit he turned these reflections,
earth-shaking lord Poseidon uplifted a mountainous wave there,
terrible, savage, and arching above him, and hurled it upon him.
Just as a turbulent wind tosses up a dry pile of chaff there,
scattering all of the wisps in one direction and other,
so it scattered the long raft timbers; but lord Odysseus
mounted astride of a single beam like a man on a racehorse,
stripping away the clothes that the radiant Calypso had given.
Straightway under his chest he spread out the veil of the goddess,
plunged headfirst in the sea with his arms spread wide for the swimming,
eager to swim; and the powerful shaker of earth then perceived him.
Shaking his head, he addressed his own heart and considered the matter:
“So now suffer abundant afflictions and drift in the sea-way,
till you arrive at the people whom Zeus has nurtured and favored.
Still I imagine you shall not make little of all your affliction.”
Thus having spoken, he lashed the beautiful-maned team of horses,
coming to Aegae, the place where his glorious dwelling is founded.
Yet the gray-eyed goddess Athena devised a new counsel.
All of the pathways of all other winds she bound fast and securely,
ordering every wind to lie down and to slumber in stillness.
Only the rapidly blowing North she aroused and broke wave-crests,
so that illustrious Zeus-born Odysseus might reach the oar-loving
people Phaeacian, fleeing the doom that is death and destruction.
Two nights long and two whole days on the densely packed sea swell
there he was driven, and often his heart looked straight at destruction.
Yet when the beautiful-haired Dawn brought the third day upon him,
then at last the wind lay down, and a calm without wind was
spread; and he suddenly saw the land very near to his body,
sharply observing ahead as a mountainous wave raised him upward.
Just as the life of a father is welcome and dear to his children,
one who in sickness lies and endures overpowering sorrows,
wasting away for a long time, a hateful divinity haunting,
till to their joy the gods free him at last from the evil affliction,
so did the land and the trees show welcome and dear to Odysseus.
Hard he swam onward, desiring to set both his feet on the dry land.
Yet when as far from the shore as a voice crying loudly can carry,
then he could hear the sea booming against all the teeth of the rock face.
Great waves thundered and broke on the outermost edge of the dry land,
terribly belching, while all of the coast was surrounded with salt spray.
No ship-holding harbor was there and no roadstead afforded;
only projecting headlands and rock teeth and high-rising cliff walls.
Then were Odysseus’ knees unstrung and the heart in his body;
deeply disturbed, he addressed his own great-hearted spirit and told it:
“Sorrow! Now Zeus lets me see land beyond expectation,
after I finally crossed the whole of this gulf of the sea-way,
yet no escape from the gray-colored water is anywhere shown me.
Sharp-running crags lie offshore, and around them a wave is continually
roaring and churning, while steeply the rock rises upward behind them.
Deep is the sea at the shoreline, and nowhere am I able to stand on
both of my feet and escape from the evil that comes to destroy me.
If I attempt to climb outward, a mountainous wave may seize me,
hurl me against the solid stone, and my struggle be fruitless.
Yet if I swim still further along in the hope of discovering
gently shelving beaches or harbors protected from ocean,
then I am frightened the squall of the storm shall again seize me upward,
carry me heavily groaning across the fish-thronging sea-way;
or some divinity sends a monster against me from salt brine,
one from the swarm that the famous Amphitrite feeds in the sea depth,
since I know how the famous shaker of earth has become hostile to me.”
While in the depth of his mind and his spirit he turned these reflections,
then an enormous wave brought him straight to the jagged-edged shoreline.
There would the skin have been stripped and his bones have been broken asunder,
had not the gray-eyed goddess Athena suggested a counsel.
Lunging ahead, with both of his hands he took hold of the rock face,
clinging and groaning until the enormous wave finally passed him.
Thus he escaped it; but backward the water came leaping against him,
striking and throwing him far from the land in the midst of the sea-way.
Just as an octopus dragged from the depth of its den in the seafloor
has many pebbles adhering to cups on the ends of its tentacles,
so from the bold hands of the hero the skin was stripped on the rock face;
over his head the enormous wave closed and covered Odysseus.
There before destiny wretched Odysseus surely had perished,
had not the gray-eyed goddess Athena provided him clear sense.
Up from the surf where the water came belching against the dry shoreline,
swimming outside it, he looked to the coast in the hope of discovering
gently shelving beaches or harbors protected from ocean.
Yet when in swimming he came to the mouth of a beautiful river,
there at last did the ground seem best for the man in his judgment,
free of all stones and provided with shelter from wind and the tempest.
Feeling the current that flowed, in the depth of his heart he petitioned:
“Hear me, O lord, whoever you are; I come much imploring,
fleeing the sea and the threatening anger of lord Poseidon.
Even to gods everlasting a wandering man is held sacred
when he arrives as a fugitive, just as I now have arrived at
both your stream and your knees after suffering many afflictions.
Pity me, lord, for I call and declare myself now your suppliant.”
Thus did he speak, and the god stayed the current and held back the wave there,
calming the water before him and bringing him safe to the river’s
mouth. He bent both his knees and let both of his powerful hands fall;
utterly crushed by the sea was the heart in the depth of his bosom.
All of his flesh was swollen, and seawater streamed from his body,
running in torrents from mouth and nostrils; without breath or speech there
down he lay, barely living, and terrible weariness seized him.
Yet when at last he recovered his breath and his spirit was gathered,
then from his body he loosened the veil of the goddess and cast it
into the seaward-flowing river; an enormous wave bore it
backward and down on the current, and Ino immediately took it
into her well-loved hands. From the river Odysseus turned then,
sank in the reeds, and he kissed the grain-giving breadth of the plowland.
Deeply disturbed, he addressed his own great-hearted spirit and told it:
“Sorrow! What happens to me? What shall come at the end of my struggle?
If I keep anxious watch through the night by the side of the river,
cold that is evil together with dew that is soaking may finish
me, since I have no strength and my spirit is gasping and weary;
while toward the dawn cold wind blows out from the stream of the river.
Yet if I climb this slope to the shade of the forest and settle
down in the densely grown brush, if the cold and the weariness leave me,
letting the sweetness of sleep come over my body and hold me,
then I am frightened wild beasts shall make me their spoil and their carrion.”
Yet as he weighed it, this seemed in his mind to be greatly the better.
Up to the forest he went and discovered it close to the water,
there on a rise in the clearing; he crept underneath double thicket,
two trees sprung from a single stock, one wild and one cultivated.
Neither the force of the moist-blowing winds could penetrate through them,
nor could the shining sun strike through with the light of its sunbeams,
nor could the rain soak through, for the two trees were densely entangled,
each interlaced with the other. Beneath them the lord Odysseus
crept and immediately heaped up a broad bed there with his strong hands,
since an abundant drift of the leaves that had fallen was lying,
ample to cover and shelter two men, or even three mortals,
there in the winter season, although the weather were bitter.
Seeing the bed, the steadfast and noble Odysseus rejoiced there,
lay in the midst, and poured the abundance of fallen leaves over him.
Just as a man in a pile of the dark-colored ashes will bury
one burning log at the furthest edge of his fields, with no neighbors,
saving the seed of the fire so he need not seek it from elsewhere,
so in the leaves did Odysseus bury himself; and Athena
poured sleep over his eyes, to release him as quickly as might be
out of his toil-worn weariness, closing his well-loved eyelids.
