Then the old woman ran to the upper room with laughter about her,
going to tell her mistress her own dear husband was inside there.

Fast beat her knees in haste, and her feet kept stumbling beneath her.

Then she stood at her head and addressed her, speaking a word there:

“Wake, Penelope, wake now, dear child, so that you may witness
with your own eyes the thing you have longed for all your days to see now.

Here is Odysseus, come back home to his house, though he came late.

And he has killed the haughty suitors, those men who in his household
wrought him affliction and ate his wealth and oppressed his son there.”
Then in return the circumspect Penelope answered:

“Dear nurse, the gods have made you mad, they who are able
even to make a very wise mind foolish and witless,
and can endow a thoughtless one with a share of good judgment.

They have unhinged your mind;

before, your senses were steady.

Why do you mock me, when I carry a heart full of sorrows,
telling me these wild things, and waking me up from my slumber,
sweet sleep, that closed all around my dear eyelids and bound them?

Never until now have I slept so deeply as on this occasion,
since Odysseus went away to see that evil-named Ilion.

Come now, go down again and return to the hall of the house there.

If any other among all the women that wait in my household
came and told me these things and awakened me out of my slumber,
I would have sent her quickly away with harshness, back to the hall there,
but in your case your old age will be your profit in this matter.”
Then in return the dear nurse Eurycleia answered:

“Child, I am not mocking you, dear one;

in very truth now
here is Odysseus, come back home to his house, as I tell you,
that very stranger whom all men dishonored here in the palace.

Long since Telemachus had known that he was here in the household,
but in his prudence he kept concealed his father’s intentions,
so that he might exact punishment for the force of those proud men.”
So she spoke, and she rejoiced, and sprang from the bed in her gladness,
clasped the old woman around, and tears came down from her eyelids.

Then lifting her voice she addressed her with winged words, saying:

“Come then, dear nurse, tell me this truly and with no falsehood:

if in very truth he has come to the house, as you are saying,
how did he ever lay hands on the shameless suitors and master them,
being alone by himself, while they were forever assembled within there?”
Then in return the dear nurse Eurycleia answered:

“I did not see it, nor did I learn it;

I only heard groaning
from the men being killed;

while we in the innermost chamber
sat there confounded, and the close-fitted doors held firmly.

Not until then did your son call me out from the hall of the house there,
Telemachus;

for his father had sent him ahead to call me.

Then I found Odysseus standing among the bodies of the slaughtered;

and they about him, holding the beaten hard floor all around him,
lay there piled on one another;

your heart would have softened to see it.

Now they all in a mass are lying beside the courtyard doorways,
while he is purifying the beautiful house all around there,
having kindled a great fire;

and he sent me to call you.

Come now and follow, so joy may come over the dear heart of both of you,
since very many afflictions and evils have both of you suffered.

Now at long last this ancient desire has reached its fulfillment.

He himself has come living to his own hearth and dwelling,
and he has found both you and his son still here in the household;

and the suitors who worked him harm he punished, all of them, in his house there.”
Then in return the circumspect Penelope answered:

“Dear nurse, do not yet exalt too greatly in laughter and triumph.