and he wept as he held in his arms his dear wise-hearted lady.

As when the land appears most welcome to men who are swimming,
those whose stout-built ship Poseidon has shattered at sea there,
driving it on with the wind and the towering blast of the billows;

few escape from the gray sea and swim till they come to the mainland,
and much salt scurf is caked on their skin from the wash of the brine there;

gladly they set foot then upon land, having fled their destruction:

so to her gaze her husband was welcome as she looked upon him,
nor yet from around his neck did she wholly let go her white forearms.

And now on their weeping would Dawn have appeared with rose-red fingers,
had not the goddess grey-eyed Athena conceived one thing further.

At the world's rim she held back the long night, and Dawn in her turn she
stayed by the stream of Ocean, gold-throned, nor let her harness
her swift-foot horses that carry the light of day to men,
Lampos and Phaethon, the colts that draw in the Dawn light.

Then to his wife spoke resourceful Odysseus in answer:

“Wife, we have not yet come to the end of all our trials,
but still there lies before us labor beyond all measure,
great and grievous, and all of it I must bring to completion.

So did the spirit of Teiresias prophesy to me
on that day when I went down within the house of Hades,
seeking the homecoming there for my comrades and for myself.

But come now, wife, let us go to our bed, so that already
laid in sweet sleep's arms we may take our delight in slumber.”
Then in return to him prudent Penelope answered:

“Surely your bed will be ready whenever your own heart
wishes it, since indeed the gods have made you return here
to your well-builded house and the land of your fathers.

But since you have spoken, and a god has cast in your spirit
this, come, tell me the trial;

for later also, I think,
I shall learn it, and to know it at once is nothing the worse.”
Then in return to her spoke resourceful Odysseus:

“Strange woman, why now are you urging and pressing me so much
to tell it?

Yet I shall speak and hide nothing from you.

Truly your heart will not take any joy in it;

for not even
I rejoice, since he ordered me still to go among many
towns of men, with a shapely oar held fast in my hands,
until at last I come where there are men who know nothing
of the sea, and never eat food that is mixed up with salt.

Neither indeed do they know of the ships with cheeks painted red,
nor of the shapely oars that are wings to the ships upon water.

And he declared to me this unmistakable sign, nor will I
hide it from you:

when another wayfaring man meets me
and says that upon my bright shoulder I carry a winnow,
then there he ordered me, planting the oar in the earth, to
offer fair sacrifices to lord Poseidon the ruler,
ram and bull, and a boar that mounts on the backs of the sows then,
then to go homeward again, and offer sacred hecatombs
to the immortal gods who possess the broad heaven above us,
all in due order.

And death out of the sea for myself too
shall come, most gentle indeed, such a death as will slay me
when I am worn by sleek old age;

and the people around me
shall be prosperous.

All these things he declared will be fulfilled.”
Then in return to him prudent Penelope answered:

“If indeed the gods will accomplish a better old age for you,
then there is hope that after our evils escape will be given.”
So then they spoke such things in speech to one another.

Meanwhile Eurynome and the nurse were preparing the bedstead
with soft woven cloths, while bright torches flared in the chamber.

But when they had spread the firm bedstead, working in haste there,
the old woman turned and went back to the house to lie down;