But let us consider ourselves how this matter may turn out best now.

Even when one man has killed a single man in the country,
one who has not many others behind him to aid and avenge him,
still he goes into exile, leaving his kinsmen and homeland.

But we have killed the mainstay of all the city, the noblest
youths in Ithaca.

On this I bid you to turn your mind fully.”
Then in answer to him spoke forth prudent Telemachus wisely:

“Look to these things yourself, dear father;

for men say your counsel
is the best among mortals, and no man born for dying
could contend against you in wisdom, nor strive there beside you.

We for our part will follow with zeal, and I do not think ever
we shall be lacking in courage, so far as our power extends here.”
Then in turn the much-counseling Odysseus answered and told him:

“Therefore I shall declare what seems to me to be the best way.

First of all, you must bathe and put tunics on your bodies,
and command the serving women within these halls to dress also.

Then let the godlike singer, with clear-toned lyre in his hands there,
lead us on in the measures of dancing that gladdens the spirit,
so that whoever may hear it outside will suppose it a wedding,
whether some passer-by on the road, or a neighbor about us.

Let not the wide report of the slaughter of all these suitors
spread through the town before we have gone from here and departed
out to our farm in the fields, rich-grown with trees;

and thereafter
we shall consider what gain Olympian Zeus may provide us.”
So he spoke, and they heard him with care, and obeyed what he told them.

First of all they bathed, and clothed themselves in their tunics;

then the women dressed;

and the godlike singer took up
into his hands the carved lyre, and stirred in them all the desire there
for sweet song and for dancing in blameless joy and delightfulness.

All around them the great hall echoed aloud to the footsteps
of men making merry, and women fair-girdled in dancing.

Thus would someone say, hearing the sound from outside of the dwelling:

“Surely at last someone now has wedded the queen much courted.

Cruel woman, she had not the heart to keep safe the great household
of her own lawful husband until he returned there in person.”
Thus a man would say, for they did not know how matters had happened.

Meanwhile within his own house great-hearted Odysseus was tended:

Eurynome the housekeeper bathed him and rubbed him with olive,
and about him she cast a fair cloak and a tunic beside it.

Then Athena poured beauty abundantly down from his head there,
making him taller to look on and fuller;

and down from his head she
sent curling locks to flow, like the bloom of the hyacinth flower.

As when a man overlays silver with gold, one well skilled there,
whom Hephaestus and Pallas Athena have taught in all craftsman’s
art, and he brings to completion his work with grace and with beauty,
So she poured grace and beauty around on his head and his shoulders.

Out of the bath he stepped, in form like the deathless immortals;

then once again he sat on the chair from which he had risen,
facing his wife, and spoke and addressed her directly in words:

“Strange woman, surely to you beyond all the daughters of women
they who possess Olympian halls have given an iron heart there.

No other woman would ever have held herself off in her spirit
thus from her husband, who, bearing so many afflictions and hardships,
came in the twentieth year to the land of his fathers and homeland.

Come then, dear nurse, make ready my bed, so that I as well now
may lie down by myself, for the heart in her breast is of iron.”
Then resourceful Penelope answered him, prudent in spirit:

“Strange man, I am not exalting myself, nor slighting your person,
nor am I over-amazed;