I know very well what you looked like
when you set out from Ithaca there on the long-oared sea-vessel.

Come then, Eurycleia, prepare for him the close-jointed bedstead
outside the strong-built chamber, the chamber that he himself fashioned.

Set out there for him the close-jointed bed, and upon it cast bedding,
fleeces and mantles and rugs that gleam with their polished brightness.”
So then she spoke, while testing her husband;

and great Odysseus,
stung into anger, spoke to his wife who knew good and faithful counsel:

“Woman, indeed you have spoken a word that pains my heart deeply.

Who has set my bed in another place?

Hard would the labor
be, even for one well skilled, unless some god should come to it
and, with ease if he wished, set it down in a different station.

None of mankind that lives, no mortal man, not even in prime strength,
could with ease shift it away;

for a notable sign has been fashioned
in that well-crafted bed, and I wrought it, no one beside me.

There was a long-leaved olive tree growing inside the enclosure,
flourishing still in its prime, and its trunk was thick as a pillar.

Round it I built our chamber and labored until I had finished,
using close-fitted stones, and I roofed it well high above us,
and I set on the doors, fitted close, with panels compacted together.

Then after that I lopped off the crown of the long-leaved olive,
and from the root upward I trimmed and planed the trunk with the bronze there
well and with careful skill, and I brought it straight by the line-rule,
shaping a bedpost from it, and I bored it all through with the auger.

Starting from this I shaped out the bed, till I brought it to finish,
decorating it over with gold and with silver and ivory;

then I stretched out upon it a strap of oxhide, bright crimson.

Thus I reveal to you this sign;

yet I do not know in my spirit,
woman, whether my bed is still fixed and steadfast, or whether
some man has moved it elsewhere, by cutting the olive beneath it.”
So he spoke, and her knees were unstrung, and her dear heart within her,
as she knew the sure signs that Odysseus had told and made clear there;

then, bursting in tears, she ran straight toward him, and with both arms
clasped the neck of Odysseus, kissed his head, and then told him:

“Do not be angry with me, Odysseus, since in all matters
you were the wisest of men;

but the gods assigned us affliction,
gods who begrudged that we, abiding beside one another,
should rejoice in our youth and arrive at the threshold of old age.

Yet do not now be vexed with me for this, nor hold it against me,
because when first I saw you I did not embrace you so fondly.

Always my heart in the breast that is mine kept trembling within me,
lest some mortal man should come and deceive me by speaking;

for there are many who plot for themselves base profits and evil.

Not even Argive Helen, the daughter begotten by Zeus there,
would have mingled in love and in bed with a man from a strange land,
had she known that the warlike sons of the Achaeans after
all would bring her back to her home and her dear native country.

It was a god who impelled her to do that shameful action;

nor before then did she lay in her heart that ruinous blindness,
from which there came to us too the grief that first overtook us.

But now, since you have recounted the signs most clear and unmistakable
of our bed, which no other mortal had ever beheld there,
save only you and I, and one lone handmaid beside us,
Actoris, whom my father once gave me when first I came here,
she who would guard for us both the doors of our close-built chamber,
now you persuade my heart, though stubborn and hard it has been there.”
So then she spoke, and in him she roused still stronger desire for weeping;