You know how welcome his appearing would be in these chambers
to all, and most of all to me and the son we begot together.

But this tale you tell is not in truth exactly as spoken;

rather some one of the immortals killed the glorious suitors,
angered by their spirit-grieving outrage and evil actions.

For they respected no one at all of the earth-dwelling mortals,
neither the bad man nor yet the good, whoever approached them.

Therefore through their own recklessness they have suffered.

But Odysseus
lost his homecoming far from the land of Achaea, and perished.”
Then in return the dear nurse Eurycleia answered:

“My child, what sort of word has escaped through the fence of your teeth there,
that, though your husband is here by the hearth in the house, you declare
he will not come back home?

Your heart is forever distrustful.

Come then, I will tell you another clear sign for your knowing:

the scar that long ago a boar drove in him with his white tusk there.

Washing him, I observed it, and I wished to tell you of it,
you yourself;

but he took hold and laid his hands on my mouth there,
and would not let me tell it, for his mind is full of all cunning.

But come now and follow;

and I will lay down my life as the wager:

if I am deceiving you, kill me with the most pitiful ruin.”
Then in return the circumspect Penelope answered:

“Dear nurse, it is hard for you to discern the designs of the gods there,
to draw them forth, though indeed you are very wise in your thinking.

Still, even so, let us go to my son, so that I may behold
these suitors lying dead, and the man who has slaughtered them.”
So she spoke and came down from her upper chamber;

and deeply her spirit
wavered, whether apart she should question her dear lord and husband,
or should go and stand by and kiss his head and his hands as she held them.

But when she had entered and passed over the threshold of stone there,
then she sat down facing Odysseus, there in the glow of the firelight,
close by the opposite wall;

and he by the tall pillar's side there
sat with his eyes to the ground, still waiting to hear whether something
his noble wife would say to him, now that her eyes had beheld him.

Long she sat there in silence, and wonder came over her spirit;

sometimes she looked straight on him and knew him there by his features,
sometimes she failed to perceive him, because of the vile clothes upon him.

Then Telemachus scolded her, and spoke, and called to her plainly:

“Mother of mine, hard mother, with pitiless heart in your bosom,
why do you keep so apart from my father, and why do you never
sit yourself near him and ask him questions and search out the matter?

Surely no other woman with heart that endured would have held back
thus from her husband, if he after suffering many afflictions
came in the twentieth year to the land of his fathers and homeland.

But in your breast your heart is always more stubborn than stone is.”
Then resourceful Penelope answered and said to him in reply:

“Child of mine, in my breast my spirit is struck into wonder;

I cannot say any word to him, I cannot ask him a question,
nor can I look in his eyes and face him.

But if in truth now
this is Odysseus and he has come to his home, then more surely
we shall know one another, and better;

for tokens are with us,
signs that are hidden from others, which only we two have knowledge of.”
So she spoke, and the great-souled, long-enduring Odysseus smiled then,
and at once to Telemachus spoke these winged words in answer:

“Telemachus, let your mother within these halls make her trial
of me;

soon enough she will know me more surely and better.

Now because I am foul, and I have mean garments around me,
therefore she slights me, and still she does not admit I am that man.