And when they were inside the high-roofed house,
he carried the spear to the tall pillar and set it upright
inside the polished spear-rack, where already other
spears stood in numbers, enduring-hearted Odysseus' own;
and he led her to a high seat, spreading linen beneath her,
a beautiful seat, cunningly worked, with a footstool for her feet.
For himself he set a painted bench beside her, apart from the others,
the suitors, for fear the stranger, sickened by the din,
might lose all taste for supper, fallen among bullies —
and so that he might ask him about his absent father.
A handmaid brought water for their hands in a pitcher,
a beautiful golden one, and poured it over a silver basin
for them to wash, and drew up a polished table beside them.
The grave housekeeper brought bread and set it before them,
laying out delicacies in plenty, giving gladly of her store;
a carver lifted platters of meat of every kind
and set them down, and placed gold cups beside them,
and a herald kept coming round to them, pouring the wine.

In came the lordly suitors, and they took their seats
in order on the benches and the high-backed chairs.
Heralds poured water over their hands,
slave-women heaped bread in baskets at their sides,
and young men crowned the mixing-bowls with drink,
and their hands went out to the good things spread before them.
But when they had put away desire for food and drink,
the suitors — other things now filled their hearts:
song and dance, for these are the ornaments of a feast.
A herald put the beautiful lyre into the hands
of Phemius, who sang for the suitors under compulsion,
and he swept the strings and struck up his lovely singing.

But Telemachus spoke to gray-eyed Athena,
leaning his head close, so that the others might not hear:
"Dear stranger, will you take offense at what I say?
These men care only for such things — the lyre and song —
and easily, since unpunished they devour another man's living:
a man whose white bones rot somewhere in the rain,
lying on a mainland shore, or the salt wave rolls them.
But if they saw him once come home to Ithaca,
every man of them would pray to be quicker on his feet
rather than richer in gold and fine clothes.
But no — he has perished by an evil doom, and for us there is
no comfort left, not though some man upon the earth
should say he is coming still: his day of homecoming is lost.
But come, tell me this, and tell it to me truly:
What man are you, and from where? Where are your city and your parents?
On what kind of ship did you come? And how did sailors
bring you to Ithaca? Who did they claim to be?
For I hardly think you came here on foot.
And tell me this too, honestly, so that I may know it:
is this your first coming here, or are you from of old
my father's guest-friend? For many were the men who came
to our house — since he, too, went much among mankind."