Then Zeus who gathers the clouds answered her:
"My child, what a word has slipped the fence of your teeth!
How could I ever forget godlike Odysseus,
who is beyond all mortals in mind, and beyond all others gave
offerings to the deathless gods who hold wide heaven?
No: it is Poseidon who holds the earth, in anger
unbending, always, for the Cyclops, whose one eye Odysseus blinded —
godlike Polyphemus, whose power is greatest
among all the Cyclopes. The nymph Thoösa bore him,
daughter of Phorcys, a lord of the barren salt sea,
when in her hollow caves she lay with Poseidon.
Ever since, Poseidon the shaker of earth does not kill
Odysseus, but drives him wandering from his father's land.
But come, let all of us here take careful thought together
for his homecoming — how he shall come. Poseidon will let go
his anger. He cannot, against us all,
wrangle alone in the teeth of the deathless gods."

Then the goddess answered him, gray-eyed Athena:
"Father of us all, son of Cronos, highest of the mighty,
if this now truly pleases the blessed gods,
that Odysseus of the many designs come home to his own house,
then let us dispatch Hermes, the guide, the slayer of Argus,
to the island Ogygia, so that with all speed
he may tell the nymph of the lovely braids our fixed decree:
the homecoming of enduring-hearted Odysseus — that he shall return.
And I will go to Ithaca, to stir his son
the more, and set strength of purpose in his heart
to call the long-haired Achaeans into assembly
and speak out to all the suitors, who day upon day
slaughter his thronging flocks and his shambling crook-horned cattle.
And I will send him to Sparta and to sandy Pylos
to ask after his dear father's homecoming, if he may hear of it —
and so that good report among men may be his."

So she spoke, and bound beneath her feet the beautiful sandals,
ambrosial, golden, that carry her over the water
and over the boundless earth with the breath of the wind;
and she took up her strong spear, edged with sharp bronze,
heavy, huge, and solid, with which she breaks the ranks of men,
of heroes, when the daughter of the mighty Father is angered.
Down she went, darting from the peaks of Olympus,
and stood in the land of Ithaca at Odysseus' doorway,
on the courtyard's threshold, the bronze spear in her palm,
in the likeness of a stranger: Mentes, leader of the Taphians.

There she found the lordly suitors. They were pleasing
their hearts with counters, out in front of the doors,
sitting on hides of oxen they themselves had slaughtered,
with heralds and quick serving-men among them:
some were mixing wine and water in the great bowls,
and some were wiping the tables down with porous sponges
and setting them out, and some carved meat in plenty.

Godlike Telemachus saw her far the first,
for he sat among the suitors, sore at heart,
seeing his noble father in his mind's eye: if only he would come
from somewhere, and make a scattering of the suitors through the house,
and take back his honor, and be lord of his own possessions.
So he brooded, sitting among the suitors — and he saw Athena.

He went straight for the porch, indignant at heart
that a stranger be left standing at the door; and standing near her
he took her right hand, and relieved her of the bronze spear,
and lifting his voice he spoke winged words to her:
"Welcome, stranger. Here you will find kindness — and afterward,
when you have tasted supper, you shall tell us what you need."
So saying he led the way, and Pallas Athena followed.