So gray-eyed Athena spoke, and she was gone,
flown up and away like a bird. And in his heart
she had set strength and courage, and brought his father to his mind
more even than before. And when he sensed it in his mind,
he was awed at heart, for he guessed she was a god.
And at once he went back among the suitors, a man like a god himself.

For them the famous singer was singing, and they in silence
sat and listened. He sang the Achaeans' homecoming,
the bitter one, that Pallas Athena laid on them out of Troy.

From her upper room she took into her heart the god-filled song:
Icarius' daughter, watchful-minded Penelope.
She came down the steep stairway of her house,
not alone: two handmaids came attending her.
And when she reached the suitors, shining among women,
she stood beside the pillar of the close-built roof,
holding her glistening veil before her cheeks,
a trusted handmaid standing on either side,
and in tears she spoke to the godlike singer:
"Phemius, you know many other spells for mortal ears,
deeds of men and gods, that singers make renowned.
Sit and sing them one of those, and let them drink
their wine in silence. But break off this song,
this bitter song that forever wears away the heart
in my breast — for on me above all has fallen grief past forgetting.
So dear a face I long for, remembering always,
the man whose fame goes wide through Hellas and the heart of Argos."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered her:
"Mother, why grudge the trusted singer his right
to please us however his mind is moved? Singers are not
to blame: Zeus, surely, is to blame, who gives
to men who eat bread whatever he wills, to each man singly.
There is no fault in him for singing the Danaans' hard doom:
men will always give their louder praise to the song
that comes to its hearers newest on the air.
Let your heart and spirit steel themselves to hear it.
Odysseus was not the only one to lose his day of homecoming
at Troy: many other men were lost as well.
Go into the house and see to your own work,
the loom and the distaff, and command your handmaids
to go about their work. The word belongs to men —
to all men, and to me above all: mine is the power in this house."

In wonder, she went back into the house,
for she laid her son's clear-headed word to heart.
Climbing to her upper room with her serving-women,
she wept there for Odysseus, her dear husband, until
gray-eyed Athena cast sweet sleep upon her eyelids.

But the suitors broke into uproar through the shadowy halls,
and every man of them prayed to lie beside her in bed.
And clear-headed Telemachus began to speak among them:
"Suitors of my mother, insolent past all bearing,
for now let us feast and take our pleasure — but with no more
shouting, since it is a fine thing to listen to a singer
such as this man is, with a voice like the gods'.
But at dawn let us go and take our seats in assembly,
all of us, so I may declare my word to you outright:
get out of my halls. Go busy yourselves with other feasts,
eating your own goods, moving from house to house.
But if this seems to you the better thing, the more profitable,
that one man's living be destroyed and nothing paid,
then carve away. And I will cry to the gods who live forever,
in hope that Zeus may grant deeds of requital come to pass:
then you would die inside this house, and nothing paid for you."

So he spoke, and all of them bit hard into their lips,
marveling at Telemachus, that he spoke so boldly.
Then Antinous spoke to him, Eupeithes' son:
"Telemachus, surely the gods themselves are teaching you
to talk so high and speak with so much daring.
May the son of Cronos never make you king in sea-circled
Ithaca — though by blood it is your inheritance."