After her I saw Antiope, Asopus' daughter,
who could boast she had slept in the very arms of Zeus,
and she bore two sons, Amphion and Zethus,
who first founded the seat of seven-gated Thebes
and walled it round — for without walls they could not
live in wide-dancing-grounded Thebes, strong though they were.

After her I saw Alcmene, Amphitryon's wife,
who bore Heracles, the lion-hearted, bold in the fight,
after she lay mingled in the arms of great Zeus;

and Megara, daughter of high-spirited Creon,
whom Amphitryon's son held as wife — the man whose strength never wore.

And I saw the mother of Oedipus, beautiful Epicaste,
who did a monstrous thing in the ignorance of her mind,
marrying her own son;

and he, who had killed his father,
married her;

and the gods made it known among men at once.

Yet he ruled on over the Cadmeians in lovely Thebes,
suffering pains, through the gods' deadly designs;

and she went down to the house of Hades, strong warden of the gate,
fastening a noose to hang sheer from the high roof-beam,
gripped by her anguish — and left behind for him the pains
past counting that a mother's Furies bring to pass.

And I saw Chloris, beautiful past telling, whom Neleus once
married for her beauty, bringing bride-gifts past number:

youngest daughter of Amphion, Iasus' son,
who once ruled in strength in Minyan Orchomenus.

She was queen of Pylos, and bore him shining children:

Nestor, and Chromius, and lordly Periclymenus,
and after them she bore that wonder of mortals, strong Pero,
whom all the neighboring men were courting;

but Neleus
would give her to no man who could not drive off
the crook-horned, broad-browed cattle of mighty Iphicles
out of Phylace — a dangerous herd.

Only the blameless seer
undertook to drive them;

and the hard doom of a god bound him fast,
the cruel bonds, and the herdsmen of the wild.

But when at last the months and the days were coming to fulfillment,
as the year rolled round and the seasons came again,
then at last mighty Iphicles set him free,
when he had told out all the decrees of fate.

And the design of Zeus was accomplished.

And I saw Leda, wife of Tyndareus,
who bore to Tyndareus two strong-hearted sons:

Castor the horse-breaker, and Polydeuces good with his fists.

These two the life-giving earth holds — both of them living:

even under the earth they have honor from Zeus,
and live turn about, one day each in turn,
and each in turn are dead.

They have won honor equal to the gods'.

After her I saw Iphimedeia, wife of Aloeus,
who could say that she had lain with Poseidon,
and she bore two sons — but short-lived they proved —
godlike Otus, and far-famed Ephialtes:

the tallest men the grain-giving earth ever nourished,
and far the most beautiful, after famous Orion.

At nine years old they measured nine cubits
across, and stood nine fathoms high;

and they threatened the very immortals — to carry
the din of furious war up into Olympus.

Ossa they strained to pile on Olympus, and on Ossa
Pelion of the shivering leaves, to make heaven scalable.

And they would have accomplished it, had they reached the measure of manhood;

but the son of Zeus, whom fair-haired Leto bore, destroyed them
both, before the down had bloomed beneath their temples
and thickened on their chins in the flower of a young beard.

And Phaedra I saw, and Procris, and beautiful Ariadne,
the daughter of Minos the deadly-minded, whom Theseus once
carried off from Crete, making for the hill of holy
Athens — and had no joy of her:

Artemis killed her first,
on sea-ringed Dia, on the testimony of Dionysus.

And Maera I saw, and Clymene, and hateful Eriphyle,
who took precious gold as the price of her own husband.