Now when holy Persephone had scattered
the women's souls this way and that,
there came the soul of Agamemnon, Atreus' son,
grieving;

and around him others were gathered — all who
died with him in the house of Aegisthus, and met their doom.

He knew me at once, when he had drunk the dark blood,
and he wept, shrill and loud, letting the big tears fall,
stretching his hands toward me, straining to reach me —
but there was no strength grounded in him now, no force
such as once filled his supple limbs.

I wept to see him, and my heart pitied him,
and lifting my voice I spoke winged words to him:

'Most glorious son of Atreus, Agamemnon, lord of men —
what doom of death, that lays men low, mastered you?

Did Poseidon master you in your ships,
rousing the wretched blast of hard winds?

Or did hostile men cut you down on dry land
as you carved away their cattle and their fine flocks of sheep,
or fought them for their city and their women?'
So I spoke, and he answered me at once:

'Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus of the many devices:

Poseidon did not master me in my ships,
rousing the wretched blast of hard winds,
and hostile men did not cut me down on dry land.

Aegisthus built my death and my doom,
and killed me — with my cursed wife — after calling me to his house
and feasting me:

as a man cuts down an ox at the manger.

So I died the most pitiable of deaths;

and around me my other
companions were killed without pause, like white-tusked
swine slaughtered in the house of a rich and powerful man
for a wedding, a club-feast, or a swelling banquet.

You have stood in the killing of many men before now,
cut down singly, or in the crush of battle —
but you would have grieved at heart above all to see that sight:

how around the wine-bowl and the loaded tables
we lay in the hall, and the whole floor steamed with blood.

And the most pitiful voice I heard was Priam's daughter's —
Cassandra's, whom Clytemnestra of the crooked counsels killed
over my body;

and I, dying, tried to raise my hands
and beat them down on the sword-blade — and she, the bitch-faced,
turned her back:

she could not bring herself, though I was going down to Hades,
to draw my eyelids shut with her hands, or close my mouth.

So true it is that nothing is more dread, more dog-shameless, than a woman
who can set her mind on deeds like these —
the way that woman plotted her unspeakable work,
building the murder of her own wedded husband.

And I had thought
to come home welcome to my children and my slaves!

But she — that mistress of atrocity — has poured out shame
on her own head, and on all women after her,
the female kind — yes, even on the doer of good.'
So he spoke, and I answered him and said:

'Ah, gods — how terribly has Zeus of the wide voice hated
the seed of Atreus from the beginning, and through the designs
of women:

for Helen's sake we died in our thousands,
and for you Clytemnestra set her snare while you were far away.'
So I spoke, and he answered me at once:

'Then never be gentle, you too, even to your own wife.

Do not tell out to her the whole word that you know:

say part, and let part stay hidden.

But not for you, Odysseus, will murder come from a wife.

Too understanding she is, too watchful the mind in her breast —
the daughter of Icarius, watchful-minded Penelope.

A young bride we left her, when we went
to the war;

and a boy was at her breast,
an infant, who now, I suppose, sits numbered among men —
the fortunate one!

His dear father will see him, coming home,
and he will embrace his father:

that is the right way of things.

But my wife did not let me fill even my eyes
with my own son.

She killed me before that — killed the man himself.

And I will tell you another thing:

lay it up in your heart.