Odyssey — Book 11

The dead: Tiresias' prophecy, Anticleia, the heroines, Agamemnon, Achilles, Ajax.

And when we had come down to the ship and the sea,
first of all we hauled the ship down to the bright salt water,
and set the mast and the sails in the black ship,
and took the sheep and put them aboard, and ourselves
went aboard grieving, letting the big tears fall.
And for us, behind the dark-blue-prowed ship,
a following wind that filled the sail, a good companion,
was sent by Circe of the lovely braids, dread goddess with a mortal's voice.
So when we had seen to the tackle through the ship,
we sat, and the wind and the steersman held her on course.
All day long her sail was stretched as she crossed the water;
and the sun went down, and all the ways grew dark.

She came to the limits of deep-flowing Ocean.
There is the land and city of the Cimmerian men,
shrouded in mist and cloud: never does the shining
sun look down on them with his rays,
not when he climbs toward the starry heaven,
not when he turns back from heaven to earth,
but deadly night is stretched over wretched mortals.
Coming there we beached the ship, and took out the sheep,
and walked along the stream of Ocean
until we came to the place that Circe had appointed.

There Perimedes and Eurylochus held the victims,
and I drew the sharp sword from beside my thigh
and dug a pit about a cubit's measure this way and that,
and around it I poured a drink-offering to all the dead —
first with milk and honey mingled, then with sweet wine,
the third time with water; and I sprinkled white barley over it.
And I entreated, over and over, the strengthless heads of the dead:
vowing that, come to Ithaca, I would offer in my halls
a barren heifer, my best, and heap the pyre with good things;
and to Tiresias, apart, alone, I would sacrifice a ram
all black, the one that stands out from all our flocks.
And when with vows and prayers I had entreated them,
the tribes of the dead, I took the sheep and cut their throats
over the pit, and the dark-clouded blood ran; and they gathered,
the souls of the dead who are gone, up out of Erebus:
brides, and unwed youths, and old men worn by long suffering,
and tender girls with the fresh grief on their hearts,
and many men gashed by the bronze-tipped spears,
men killed in war, in armor caked with their blood.
In crowds from every side they came flocking about the pit
with a sound that had no earthly likeness; and the pale terror took me.
Then I roused my companions, and commanded them
to flay the sheep that lay there slaughtered by the pitiless bronze,
and burn them, and pray to the gods —
to mighty Hades and dread Persephone;
and I myself, drawing the sharp sword from beside my thigh,
sat there, and would not let the strengthless heads of the dead
come near the blood before I had questioned Tiresias.