First came the soul of my companion Elpenor,
for he was not yet buried under the wide-wayed earth:
we had left his body behind in Circe's hall,
unwept and unburied, since another task was driving us.
I wept to see him, and my heart pitied him,
and lifting my voice I spoke winged words to him:
'Elpenor — how did you come here, under the misty dark?
You have outstripped me — on foot, and I in my black ship.'
So I spoke, and he groaned aloud, and answered:
'Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus of the many devices,
the evil doom of a god blinded me — that, and wine past measure.
Lying down to sleep in Circe's hall, I never thought
to come back down again by the long ladder;
I fell headlong from the roof, and my neck
snapped from the spine; and my soul came down to Hades.
Now I beg you — by those left behind, those not here beside us:
by your wife; by your father, who reared you when you were small;
by Telemachus, whom you left an only child in your halls.
For I know that when you go from here, from the house of Hades,
you will put in again with your well-made ship at the island of Aeaea:
there, my lord, I charge you: remember me.
Do not go on and leave me behind you unwept, unburied,
turning away — lest I become a cause of gods' wrath against you —
but burn me with all the armor that is mine,
and heap me a mound on the shore of the gray salt sea:
an unlucky man's marker, for men to come to learn of.
Accomplish this for me — and fix upon the mound the oar
I rowed with when I lived, when I was among my companions.'
So he spoke, and I answered him and said:
'All this, poor luckless man, I will accomplish and do.'
So the two of us sat trading grim words,
I on one side, holding my sword over the blood,
and across from me the phantom of my companion, talking on.

Then came the soul of my dead mother,
Anticleia, daughter of great-hearted Autolycus,
whom I had left alive when I went to holy Ilium.
I wept to see her, and my heart pitied her;
but even so, for all my thick grief, I would not let her
come near the blood before I had questioned Tiresias.