Then came the soul of Theban Tiresias,
holding a golden scepter;

and he knew me, and spoke:

'Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus of the many devices —
what now, unlucky man?

Why have you left the light of the sun
and come to see the dead, and this place without joy?

Draw back from the pit;

hold off your sharp sword,
so that I may drink of the blood, and tell you the unerring truth.'
So he spoke, and I stepped back, and drove the silver-studded sword
home in its sheath.

And when he had drunk the dark blood,
then at last the blameless seer addressed me:

'It is honey-sweet homecoming you seek, shining Odysseus,
and a god will make it grim for you.

For I do not think
the shaker of earth will fail to see you — the grudge is set in his heart,
raging because you blinded his dear son.

Yet even so, though you suffer evils, you may still come home,
if you are willing to hold hard your own heart and your companions',
from the hour when you first bring your well-made ship
in to the island Thrinacia, escaping the violet sea,
and find at pasture there the cattle and the strong flocks
of Helios, who sees all things and hears all things.

If you leave them unharmed, and keep your mind on homecoming,
then you may yet reach Ithaca, though you suffer evils.

But if you harm them, then I foretell destruction
for ship and companions;

and even if you yourself escape,
late you will come, and in evil case, all companions lost,
on another man's ship;

and you will find trouble in your house —
overweening men, who eat away your living,
courting your godlike wife and offering bride-gifts.

Yet, truly, you will come and repay their violence.

And when you have killed the suitors in your halls,
whether by guile or in the open, with the sharp bronze,
then go on a journey, taking a well-shaped oar,
until you come to men who know nothing of the sea,
men who eat no food that is mixed with salt,
who know nothing of red-cheeked ships,
nothing of well-shaped oars, which are wings for ships.

And I will tell you a sign, unmistakable:

it will not escape you.

When another traveler, meeting you on the road,
says you carry a winnowing-fan on your shining shoulder,
then and there fix the well-shaped oar in the earth
and offer fine victims to the lord Poseidon —
a ram, a bull, and a boar that has mounted sows —
and turn away home, and offer holy hecatombs
to the deathless gods who hold wide heaven,
to all of them, each in order.

And death will come to you
from the sea, so gentle a death, and take you
worn down under sleek old age;

and around you the peoples
will be prosperous.

This I tell you is unerring truth.'
So he spoke, and I answered him and said:

'Tiresias — all that, no doubt, the gods themselves have spun.

But come, tell me this, and tell it to me truly.

I see here the soul of my dead mother:

she sits in silence near the blood, and cannot bring herself
to look her own son in the face, or speak to him.

Tell me, lord:

how may she know me for the man I am?'
So I spoke, and he answered me at once:

'An easy word I will tell you, and set it in your mind.

Whomever of the dead who are gone you allow
to come near the blood, that one will speak you truth;

whomever you begrudge it, that one will draw back and go.'
So speaking, the soul of the lord Tiresias went back
into the house of Hades, when he had told out the decrees of fate.

But I stayed rooted where I was until my mother
came and drank the dark-clouded blood.

And at once she knew me,
and wailing she spoke winged words to me:

'My child — how did you come here, under the misty dark,
alive?

Hard it is for the living to look on all this:

for between lie great rivers, and terrible waters —
Ocean first of all, which there is no crossing on foot,
never, unless a man has a well-made ship.