Are you only now come wandering here from Troy —
after all this time — with ship and companions?

Have you not yet
been to Ithaca — not seen your wife in your own halls?'
So she spoke, and I answered her and said:

'Mother, need brought me down to Hades:

to consult the soul of Theban Tiresias.

For not yet have I come near Achaea — not yet
set foot on our own land;

I have wandered without pause, in misery,
since the day I first followed noble Agamemnon
toward Ilium of the fine horses, to fight the Trojans.

But come, tell me this, and tell it to me truly:

what doom of death, that lays men low, mastered you?

A long illness?

Or did Artemis the arrow-pourer
come with her gentle arrows, and kill you?

And tell me of my father, and the son I left behind:

does my honor still rest safe with them, or does some other
man hold it now — do they say I will come home no more?

And tell me the mind and purpose of my wedded wife:

does she stay by the boy and keep all things safe?

Or has the best man of the Achaeans married her already?'
So I spoke, and at once my honored mother answered:

'Oh yes — she stays, and more:

with an enduring heart
she is there in your halls;

and always in misery
her nights waste away, and her days, in tears.

Your fine honor no man holds yet:

at his ease
Telemachus farms the estates unchallenged, and feasts
at the equal banquets it is fitting a lawgiving man should tend:

for all men issue him the summons.

But your father stays out there
on the farm, and never comes down to the city.

Bedding
he has none — no bedstead, no cloaks, no shining blankets:

through the winter he sleeps where the slaves do, in the house,
in the ashes by the fire, and puts poor clothing on his skin;

but when summer comes, and the heavy autumn,
then anywhere along the rise of his vineyard plot
a bed of fallen leaves is thrown on the ground for him,
and there he lies grieving, and the sorrow grows great in his heart,
aching for your homecoming;

and hard old age comes on him.

And so it was with me:

so I too died and met my doom.

Not in the halls did the keen-eyed arrow-pourer
come with her gentle arrows and kill me;

no illness fell upon me, of the kind that most often
draws the life from the limbs in hateful wasting:

no — it was longing for you, your counsels, shining Odysseus,
your gentle-heartedness, that robbed me of honey-sweet life.'
So she spoke;

and I, my mind stirred, longed
to take the soul of my dead mother in my arms.

Three times I started toward her, and my heart bade me hold her;

three times, out of my hands, like a shadow or a dream
she flew.

And the grief grew sharper in my heart each time,
and lifting my voice I spoke winged words to her:

'Mother — why will you not stay for me, when I long to hold you,
so that even here in Hades, throwing our arms around each other,
the two of us might take our fill of icy mourning?

Or is this a phantom queenly Persephone
has sent me, so that I may weep and groan the more?'
So I spoke, and at once my honored mother answered:

'Ah me, my child, luckless beyond all mortal men —
in no way does Persephone, the daughter of Zeus, deceive you:

this is the settled way of mortals, when one dies.

The sinews no longer hold the flesh and bones together:

all that, the strong fury of the blazing fire
breaks down, as soon as the life has left the white bones,
and the soul flits away like a dream, and hovers.

But press on toward the light, as fast as you can.

And mark
all these things — to tell them to your wife hereafter.'