Then the two of them sat down at the trunk of the sacred olive
and plotted death for the overweening suitors.

And the goddess began to speak, gray-eyed Athena:

"Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus of the many devices —
consider how you will lay your hands on the shameless suitors,
who for three years now have lorded it through your hall,
courting your godlike wife and offering bride-gifts;

and she — grieving without pause for your homecoming, heart-deep,
gives hope to all, and makes promises to every man,
sending out messages — while her mind wills otherwise."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered her:

"Ah, gods — so I was to have perished by the same evil doom
as Agamemnon, Atreus' son, in my own halls,
had you not told me each thing rightly, goddess, in its measure.

Come then — weave a design, how I shall pay them back;

and stand beside me yourself, breathing bold fury into me,
as on the day we loosed the shining head-veil of Troy.

Were you to stand by me with that same fire, gray-eyes,
I would fight three hundred men together —
with you, sovereign goddess, when you choose in your heart to help me."
Then the goddess answered him, gray-eyed Athena:

"Oh, I will be with you — be sure of it — you will not slip my sight
when the hour comes and we are at this work.

And more than one, I think,
of the suitor-men who eat away your living
will spatter the vast floor with his blood and brains.

But come:

I will make you unknowable to every mortal.

I will wither the fine skin on your supple limbs;

I will strip the fair hair from your head;

I will wrap you in rags
such that a man would shudder to see a human being wear;

and I will dim those eyes, so beautiful before,
so that you seem a vile thing to all the suitors —
and to your wife, and to the son you left in your halls.

And you yourself:

go first of all to the swineherd,
the keeper of your pigs — whose heart is loyal to you all the same,
who loves your boy, and steady-hearted Penelope.

You will find him sitting by the swine;

and they are at pasture
by the Rock of the Raven, at the spring Arethusa,
eating acorns to their hearts' content and drinking
black water — the things that feed the rich fat on swine.

Stay there;

sit by him and question him of everything,
while I go on to Sparta, the country of beautiful women,
to summon Telemachus — your own dear son, Odysseus —
who went to wide-dancing-grounded Lacedaemon, to Menelaus,
seeking news of you, whether you were still alive anywhere."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered her:

"Why did you not tell him, then — you whose mind holds everything?

So that he too might wander in misery over the barren
sea, while other men eat away his living?"
Then the goddess answered him, gray-eyed Athena:

"Do not let him weigh too heavily on your heart.

I myself was his escort, so that he might win himself
a good report by going there.

He has no hardship — he sits
at his ease in the house of Atreus' son, with plenty before him.

True — the young men lie in ambush for him with their black ship,
hungry to kill him before he reaches his fathers' land.

But I do not look for that.

No:

sooner will the earth close over
more than one of the suitor-men who eat away your living."
So speaking, Athena touched him with her wand.

She withered the fine skin on his supple limbs;

she stripped the fair hair from his head;

and about all his limbs
she set the skin of an aged old man;

and she dimmed those eyes, so beautiful before,
and threw about him a foul rag and a tunic —
tattered things, filthy, black with reeking smoke —
and over them she dressed him in the great hide of a swift deer,
worn bald.

And she gave him a staff, and a miserable pouch,
ragged full of holes, slung on a rope of twisted cord.