And the shaker of earth came near her,
and turned her to stone, and rooted her to the sea-floor
with one downward stroke of the flat of his hand.

And he was gone.

And they spoke to one another with winged words,
the Phaeacians of the long oars, men famed for ships;

and thus one would say, with a glance at his neighbor:

"Ah me — who has shackled our fast ship on the open sea
as she drove for home — in full view, every timber of her?"
So they would say — knowing nothing of how it had been done.

And Alcinous addressed them all, and said:

"Ah, then it comes home to me — the old prophecy
of my father, who would tell us that Poseidon looked on us with anger
because we are safe escorts of all men without distinction.

He said that one day, as a beautiful ship of the Phaeacian men
came home over the misted sea from such a sending,
the god would smash her, and pile a great mountain round our city.

So the old man said.

And now it is all being accomplished.

Come then — all of us — do exactly as I say:

cease your escorting of mortals, whoever comes
to our city hereafter;

and to Poseidon let us sacrifice
twelve chosen bulls, in hope he may take pity
and not pile the long mountain round our city."
So he spoke;

and they were afraid, and made the bulls ready.

So they were praying to the lord Poseidon,
the leaders and counselors of the land of the Phaeacians,
standing around the altar.

— And noble Odysseus woke
out of sleep in his own fathers' land — and did not know it,
so long had he been gone.

For the goddess had poured a mist around him,
Pallas Athena, daughter of Zeus, so that she might make him
unknowable to all, and tell him everything through,
lest his wife should know him, and his townsmen, and his friends,
before the suitors paid for all their trespass.

And so to their lord all things showed strange —
the long straight paths, the anchorages that take ships from every wind,
the sheer-climbing rocks and the trees in full leaf.

He sprang up and stood, and stared at his own fatherland,
and then he groaned aloud, and struck both thighs
with the flats of his hands, and spoke in raw lament:

"Ah me — whose country have I come to now?

What men's?

Are they violent, savage, without justice,
or kind to strangers, with hearts that fear the gods?

Where am I to carry all this treasure?

Where am I myself
to wander?

Would it had stayed with the Phaeacians, all of it,
there where it was — and I had come to some other mighty king,
who would have hosted me kindly and sent me on my way home.

As it is, I have nowhere to put it — and I will not leave it
here, to fall as plunder to other men.

Shame on them — not righteous through and through, then, and not just,
the leaders and counselors of the Phaeacians,
who carried me off to a strange country!

They said, truly,
they would bring me to clear-skied Ithaca — and did not do it.

May Zeus of Suppliants pay them for it, who watches over
all mankind, and punishes whoever goes astray.

But come — let me count my goods and look them over,
in case they carried something off with them in the hollow ship."
So speaking he counted up the surpassingly beautiful tripods
and the cauldrons, and the gold, and the fine woven clothing —
and missed not one thing.

Then, mourning for his fatherland,
he crept along the shore of the loud-roaring sea,
grieving without pause.

And Athena came near him
in the likeness of a young man, a herder of sheep,
delicate-skinned, such as the sons of kings are,
a fine-made double cloak hanging from her shoulders,
sandals under her shining feet, a javelin in her hand.

Odysseus rejoiced at the sight of her, and came to meet her,
and lifting his voice he spoke winged words to her:

"Friend — since you are the first I meet in this country,
hail to you!