you are far the best of all mortal men
in counsel and in words, and I among all the gods
am famed for cunning and for profit.

And yet you did not know
Pallas Athena, daughter of Zeus — I who stand
beside you in every labor, always, and keep watch over you,
and who made you dear to all the Phaeacians.

Now I have come here to weave a design with you,
and to hide the goods the lordly Phaeacians
gave you for your journey home — by my own thought and counsel —
and to tell you all the cares that fate must fill
your well-built house with.

You must endure them — there is no choice —
and tell no one, no man and no woman,
none of them all, that it is you, come home from your wandering.

No:

in silence suffer your many pains, and submit to men's violence."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered her:

"Hard it is, goddess, for a mortal man who meets you to know you,
however knowing he be:

for you take what likeness you will.

This I know well — that you were kind to me once,
as long as we sons of the Achaeans made war at Troy;

but after we had sacked Priam's steep city,
and gone to our ships, and a god scattered the Achaeans,
from then on I never saw you, daughter of Zeus — never marked you
setting foot on my ship to beat some grief away from me.

No:

I wandered on, always carrying a heart torn open
in my breast, until the gods released me from evil —
until that day, in the rich land of the Phaeacian men,
when you heartened me with your words, and led me to the city yourself.

Now I beg you by your father — for I cannot think
I have truly come to clear-skied Ithaca:

it is some other
country I am turned loose in, and you are mocking me
when you tell me this, to lead my wits astray —
tell me:

am I really come to my own dear fatherland?"
Then the goddess answered him, gray-eyed Athena:

"Always the same — that mind in your breast!

And that is why I cannot forsake you in your misery:

because you are civil, and quick-witted, and steady-souled.

Gladly would any other man, come home from wandering,
have rushed to his hall to see his children and his wife;

but you — you have no wish yet to learn or to ask
until you have made trial of your wife besides — who sits
as ever in your halls, and always in misery
her nights waste away, and her days, in tears.

I, though — I never doubted it:

I knew in my heart
you would come home with all your companions lost.

But I had no mind, you see, to fight Poseidon,
my father's brother, who set the grudge in his heart,
raging because you blinded his dear son.

Come — I will show you the ground-plan of Ithaca, so you will believe.

This is the harbor of Phorcys, the old man of the sea;

and this, at the head of the harbor, the long-leafed olive;

and near it the lovely cave, full of sea-mist,
sacred to the nymphs that men call Naiads —
there is the wide vaulted cavern where you used to offer
the nymphs so many perfect hecatombs;

and this is the mountain Neriton, clothed in its forest."
So speaking, the goddess scattered the mist — and the land showed plain.

Then much-enduring noble Odysseus rejoiced —
he exulted in his own land, and kissed the grain-giving earth,
and at once he prayed to the nymphs, lifting up his hands:

"Nymphs of the springs, daughters of Zeus — I told myself
I would never see you again.

Now take my greeting
and my gentle prayers.

And we will give you gifts, as in the old days,
if the daughter of Zeus, the driver of spoils, in her grace
lets me live, and brings my dear son to his manhood."