Let Euryalus make restitution to him, using language
also a gift, for the word that he spoke was not one of due measure.”
Thus did he speak, and they all gave approval and urged it together;

each of them sent off a herald to carry a gift from his household.

Then Euryalus spoke to Alcinous, giving an answer:

“Lord Alcinous, most renowned among all of the people,
I shall make full restitution to this foreign man, as you order.

I shall present him this sword, made wholly of bronze, with a handle
fashioned of silver upon it, and round it a newly cut ivory
scabbard;

the gift shall be worth a great deal to him later.”
Thus having spoken, the silver-studded sword he set in the hands of
lord Odysseus, addressing the stranger in winged words:

“Hail, fatherly stranger.

If some harsh word was unwisely
blurted, may storm winds catch it and carry it far in the distance.

May all the gods let you see your wife and return to your homeland,
since you have suffered long, far away from the people who love you.”
Then resourceful Odysseus spoke and addressed him in answer:

“Hail to you warmly, my friend, and may gods give you happiness always.

May you hereafter never experience longing to have this
sword you have given to me, after making amends in your language.”
Thus did he speak, and he slung the silver-studded sword round his shoulders.

Then the sun entered the west, and the famous gifts lay before him.

Heralds of lordship carried the gifts to the house of Alcinous;

there all the sons of the blameless Alcinous met them and took them,
placing the beautiful gifts with the reverend queenly mother.

Then the sacred strength of the lord Alcinous led them
into the palace, and there they sat on the high seats in order.

Then the strength of Alcinous spoke to the queenly Arete:

“Wife, bring a beautiful chest, now the best one you have in the palace,
laying yourself a freshly washed mantle and tunic within it.

Heat a great cauldron of bronze on the fire, so the water is warmed there,
so that the stranger, when bathed and when seeing collected in order
all of the gifts which the blameless Phaeacian nobles have brought him,
may in the feast take delight and in hearing the song of the singer.

I shall present him the beautiful cup I possess in my household,
fashioned of gold, so he may remember me all of his lifetime,
pouring to Zeus and the rest of the gods in his own great palace.”
Thus did he speak;

then Arete commanded the serving women
swiftly to set on the fire a large tripod cauldron for bathing.

They set the great bathing cauldron directly on top of the bright fire,
pouring the water within, and they fed burning wood underneath it.

Fire wrapped all round the belly of bronze, and the water was heated.

Meanwhile, out of her chamber Arete brought forth a most lovely
chest for the stranger, and laid in it all of the beautiful presents,
clothing and gold the Phaeacian people had given Odysseus;

also she laid in a mantle and tunic of beautiful weaving.

Raising her voice, she spoke to the lord Odysseus in winged words:

“Look to the lid for yourself now, and fasten a knot on it quickly,
lest some man rob you of treasure when later you make the long voyage,
sleeping your sweet sleep aboard while the black-hulled ship carries onward.”
Then, when the much-enduring and lordly Odysseus heard her,
straightway he fitted the lid to the chest and securely he tied it,
using the intricate knot that the queenly Circe had taught him.

Straightway the housekeeper called him to enter the bath for his washing;

joyfully then his heart saw the warm bathing water before him,
since such attendance had not been provided to him for a long time,
not since he left the home of Calypso, the beautiful-haired one;