When early Dawn had appeared with her beautiful rose-colored fingers,
up from his bed rose the sacred strength of the lord Alcinous;

Zeus-born Odysseus, sacker of cities, arose from his bedding.

Then the sacred strength of the lord Alcinous led him
there to the meeting place of Phaeacians, built by the vessels.

Coming together, they sat themselves down on the stones that were polished,
close to each other;

but Pallas Athena went through the city,
taking the form of a herald who served wise lord Alcinous,
planning the homeward return of the great-hearted lord Odysseus.

Standing beside every man in the city, she spoke and addressed them:

“Come this way, leaders and counselors of the Phaeacian people,
into the meeting place, so you may hear of the wandering stranger
newly arrived at the house of the wise and renowned Alcinous,
after his sea-roads, a man who resembles the gods in his body.”
Thus having spoken, she stirred every man's strength and spirit to action.

Swiftly the meeting place and the seats became full with the people,
gathering there;

many marveled at seeing the son of Laertes,
battle-wise lord Odysseus, for Pallas Athena had poured there
marvelous grace over both of his shoulders and over his head too,
making him taller to look at and broader as well in his body,
so he might be beloved by all of the people Phaeacian,
also be dreaded, revered, and accomplish the many athletic
trials in which the Phaeacians intended to test Odysseus.

Then, when they all had assembled and come to the meeting together,
lord Alcinous stood and addressed all the people before him:

“Hear me, Phaeacian leaders and counselors, while I am speaking
what in the heart in my breast has commanded me now to declare here.

This foreign man, and I know not who he may be, has arrived here,
whether from people who live in the east or the west, to my palace,
urgently begging a homeward escort and asking assurance.

Come then, as always before, let us hasten the stranger's returning.

No mortal man, no one at all who arrives at my household,
waits for a long time grieving because he is lacking an escort.

Come, let us haul down a black-hulled vessel to shine in the salt sea,
newly constructed, and let two-and-fifty young men be selected
all through the city, as many as ever have proven the finest.

Bind all the oars to the benches securely, and come to the dry land;

afterward make your way swiftly here to my house for a banquet.

I shall provide an abundance of food for you all in the palace.

These are the orders I give to the young men;

but all of you others,
scepter-bearing kings, come into my beautiful palace,
so we may welcome the stranger inside;

let no one reject it.

Call also godlike Demodocus here, the renowned singer;

more than to anyone else the divinity gave him a song-craft,
bringing delight however his heart may inspire him to singing.”
Thus having spoken, he led, and the scepter-bearers were following;

meanwhile, a herald departed to bring the renowned singer.

Then two-and-fifty young men, the selected crew of the city,
went, as the king had commanded, along to the beach of the barren
sea;

and when they arrived at the ship and the edge of the water,
into the deep water first they launched the black-hulled vessel,
then in the black ship duly they stepped both the mast and the sails there,
fitting the oars to the thole-pins securely with straps made of leather,
all in appropriate order, and opening out the white sailcloth.

Out in the water they moored her securely, and afterward journeyed
into the great and beautiful house of the wise Alcinous.

All the verandas and courtyards and rooms of the palace were crowded,
filled with the gathering people, and many were young men and old men.