still would I gladly lie there beside golden Aphrodite.”
Thus did he speak, and the deathless divinities broke into laughter.

Only Poseidon laughed not, but continually pleaded
there with renowned Hephaestus the craftsman to set Ares free from
bondage;

and raising his voice he spoke to Hephaestus in winged words:

“Release him, and I promise you this before all the immortals:

Ares shall pay all the fine you demand that is fitting and lawful.”
Then the famous and powerfully armed Hephaestus answered:

“Do not command me, Poseidon, great god who encircles the earth-land.

Worthless indeed is the pledge that is taken in trust for a worthless
man.

How could I bind you fast in the sight of the gods everlasting
if Ares casts off both his binding and debt and escapes me?”
Then the great Earth-shaker lord Poseidon replied to Hephaestus:

“Even if Ares should cast off his debt and escape from the binding,
I shall myself pay all that he owes, and the fine shall be given.”
Then the famous and powerfully armed Hephaestus answered:

“It is not possible or right that I now should refuse you.”
Thus having spoken, the strength of Hephaestus released all the binding.

Then, when the two were set free from the bonds that were mighty around them,
straightway they sprang to their feet;

Ares went off to the Thracians,
while Aphrodite who loves laughter went to the island of Cyprus,
Paphos, where she possesses a precinct and altar made fragrant.

There all the Graces bathed her and rubbed her with oil everlasting,
such as shines over the gods who continue in life without ending;

then they arrayed her in beautiful clothes, a great wonder to look on.

These things the famous singer was singing;

and lord Odysseus
felt great delight in his heart as he heard, with the other Phaeacians,
people who loved the long oar and were famous for beautiful vessels.

Then Alcinous told Laodamas and Halius only
now to perform in the dance, since no one could rival their dancing.

Then in their hands they took a beautiful ball that was colored
purple, the work of the skilled craftsman Polybus, made for the young men.

One, having bent himself backward, would throw it toward shadowy cloud-land;

then the other would leap from the ground and would easily catch it,
light as he hung in the air, before his feet came again to the earth-land.

Then, when they tried their skill with the ball going straight up above them,
both of them danced on the grain-giving earth as they cast it between them,
rapidly throwing it backward and forward, while all the other
young men struck out the time at the ring, and an uproar arose there.

Then great Odysseus spoke to the glorious lord Alcinous:

“Lord Alcinous, most renowned among all of the people,
you made a boast that your dancers were best;

it has come to completion.

Awe and amazement possess me at heart as I look at their dancing.”
Thus did he speak, and the sacred strength of the lord Alcinous
felt great joy;

straightway he spoke to the oar-loving whole of the people:

“Hear me, Phaeacian leaders and counselors gathered around me.

This foreign man now seems to me to possess understanding.

Come then, as fitting, provide him a gift in our guest-friendship.

Twelve renowned kings hold their command in the country around us,
serving as leaders, and I am myself to be counted the thirteenth.

Let every one bring a freshly washed mantle and tunic before him,
also a talent in weight of the gold that is precious and costly;

let us collect them together at once, so the stranger may take them
into his hands and return to the feast with a heart full of gladness.