This was the way the affair would be ended at last by their portion;

Fate had appointed them all to be ruined whenever the city
took in the great horse made of wood, wherein all the Argives' best warriors
waited, conveying the doom and the death of the Trojans among them.

Then he sang how the sons of Achaeans had pillaged the city,
pouring out of the horse and abandoning hollow concealment.

Then he sang how they ravaged the high city's streets, each in his pathway,
how great Odysseus went like murderous Ares directly
into the house of Deiphobus, godlike Menelaus beside him;

there, he sang, Odysseus dared the most terrible combat,
conquering finally through great-hearted Pallas Athena.

These things the famous singer was singing;

but lord Odysseus
melted, and out from beneath both eyelids the tears wet his cheekbones.

Just as a woman will weep when she falls on her well-beloved husband,
one who has fallen in front of his city and all of his people,
striving to ward the pitiless day from his town and his children;

seeing him dying and gasping the last of his breath, she around him
pours out her body and wails in a high clear voice, while behind her
spearmen strike at her back and her shoulders with spears, and they lead her
into captivity, there to endure all the labor and sorrow;

wasted away are her cheeks by the grief that arouses most pity.

So were the pitiful tears great Odysseus shed from his eyebrows.

All of the others observed not a tear the great hero was shedding;

only Alcinous marked and observed what befell Odysseus,
sitting beside him and hearing his heavily burdened groaning.

Straightway he spoke to the oar-loving people of all Phaeacia:

“Hear me, Phaeacian leaders and counselors gathered around me;

let Demodocus now hold back from the clear-voiced lyre he is playing,
since what he sings does not bring equal joy to all of the people.

Ever since we began eating supper, and since the divine
singer arose to perform, our stranger has never yet halted
his lamentation and grief;

some mighty sorrow surrounds him.

Come then, let our singer now stop, so that we may take equal
pleasure together, both foreign guest and the people who host him.

Thus it is better by far, since all things are made for the guest we
honor, his homeward escort and gifts that in love we have given.

Just like a brother, the foreign stranger and suppliant must be
dear to the man whose intelligence has even a little attainment.

Do not conceal any longer beneath well-considered evasions
anything I ask you, for openly speaking is nobler.

Tell us the name that your father and mother have used there to call you,
also the people who live in the town and in places around it.

No mortal man in humanity ever is wholly without name,
neither the noble nor base, once he has been born among people;

parents give names to all children alike at the time they have borne them.

Tell me the land and the people you claim and the city you dwell in,
so that our vessels may carry you there with their thought for a pilot.

Ships of Phaeacians carry no helmsmen among them and never
carry the steering oars that the vessels of other men carry;

ships themselves understand every thought and the mind of the people,
knowing the cities of every humanity, knowing the rich fields;

swiftest of all things they cross every gulf of the sea and the salt waves,
covered in mist and in cloud, and they never have any fear of
coming to harm or enduring the ruin of wreck on their pathways.

Yet I once heard my father Nausithous speak in this manner:

he would declare that Poseidon regarded our people with anger,
since we give every man safe escort without any distinction;