Only in running I fear one among the Phaeacian people
might pass me by, since greatly beyond any measure the sea-waves
broke me among them, and no provision was steady aboard ship;

therefore the joints of the limbs in my body are loosened and weary.”
Thus did he speak, and they all held themselves in a motionless silence.

Only Alcinous spoke and addressed the great lord Odysseus:

“Stranger, none of the words you have spoken among us are spoken
gracelessly;

you are intending to show us the strength that attends you,
angered because this man on the field has arisen beside you,
taunting your prowess, which never a man would dishonor who knew well
how in his heart to express himself justly and speak in due measure.

Come now, listen to what I shall tell you, so later you may tell
some other hero, when you are sitting at home in your palace,
feasting beside both your wife and your children, and holding in memory
all of our prowess, the works that great Zeus has granted us also,
handed without interruption from days of the fathers before us.

We are not faultless as boxers at all, and neither as wrestlers;

fleetly we run on our feet, and with vessels we are the most skillful.

Always the feast and the lyre and the dances are dear to our people,
changes of clothing and warm bathing waters and beds for our pleasure.

Come then, all of Phaeacia's finest and most skillful dancers,
dance, so the stranger may tell his own people when homeward returning
how we surpass all other mankind in the skills we are given,
seamanship, running, and dancing together with singing and music.

Let someone hurry away and bring to Demodocus quickly
all of the clear-voiced lyre, which lies in the palace somewhere there.”
Thus spoke godlike Alcinous;

then the herald arose there,
going to bring from the house of the king the hollow-formed lyre.

Nine chosen stewards of contests arose with the herald together,
officers set by the people to order events at assemblies;

smoothly they leveled a dancing place and made wider the fine ring.

Then the herald approached and carried the clear-voiced lyre there
for Demodocus, who walked to the middle, while standing around him
boys in the earliest flower of youth, all skilled in the dance steps,
struck with their feet at the radiant floor;

and the lord Odysseus
watched the bright flicker and flash of their feet and marveled within him.

Striking the lyre, then the singer began a most beautiful song of
love between Ares and lovely-crowned goddess Aphrodite,
how they had first lain together in secret in lordly Hephaestus'
house, and how Ares gave manifold gifts and dishonored the marriage
bed of the lord Hephaestus.

Yet there came one with a message:

Helios, Sun, had seen the two gods as together they lay there.

Then, when Hephaestus had heard the heart-stinging message delivered,
into his forge he journeyed, while deep in his heart he was brooding
evil;

he placed the enormous anvil upon its foundation,
hammering chains that were never to break or be loosened, to hold them.

Then, when he fashioned the trap in his anger against god Ares,
into the chamber he went, where his own marriage bed had been placed there;

round every bedpost there he poured chains in a circle,
while many more from above, from the beam of the roof, he suspended,
fine as a spider's web, which none could discover by eyesight,
even the blessed gods, for they had been made with surpassing deception.

Then, when he poured the whole snare in a circle all over the bedstead,
he made a show of departing for Lemnos, the strongly built city,
which above all other places to him was the dearest of countries.

Ares who held the gold reins was not keeping watch without eyesight;