Twelve sheep there Alcinous slaughtered to serve them at banquet,
eight white-tusked hogs and a pair of the shambling cattle;

these they skinned and prepared, making ready the beautiful feasting.

Then the herald approached them and led the respected singer,
whom above others the Muse loved, and gave him both evil and goodness:

taking his eyesight away, she provided the sweetness of singing.

Then Pontonous set there for him a silver-studded
chair at the feast's middle place, against the great pillar reclining;

there on a peg he suspended the clear-voiced lyre above the
head of the singer, and showed how his hands could take hold of the lyre there.

Near him he placed a basket of food and a beautiful table,
also a cup full of wine he could drink when his heart should desire it.

All of their hands reached out to the excellent food spread before them.

Then, when desire for food and for drinking was put from their bodies,
Muse then inspired the singer to sing of the glories of heroes,
choosing a song whose fame at the time had ascended to heaven:

how great Odysseus quarreled with Achilles, the son of
Peleus, once in the rich feast held for the gods, and the two men
clashed in their terrible words, while lord of men Agamemnon
inwardly felt great joy that the Achaean best men were quarreling.

Thus lord Phoebus Apollo had told him in earlier prophecy,
there in the sacred Pytho, when he crossed the threshold of stonework,
asking the god;

for the great first wave of disaster was rolling
over the Trojan and Danaan peoples by counsel of great Zeus.

These things the famous singer was singing;

but lord Odysseus
took up the great purple cloak in the strength of his hands and he drew it
over his head, concealing the beautiful face he was bearing;

shame held him fast lest the people should see tears under his eyebrows.

Every time that the godlike singer would pause from the singing,
he would then wipe all the tears from his face and uncover his forehead,
lifting the two-handled cup and pouring the wine to immortals.

Yet when the singer began once again, and the best Phaeacians
urged him to sing, since they felt in their hearts great joy in the story,
then great Odysseus covered his head once again and lamented.

All of the others observed not a tear the great hero was shedding;

only Alcinous marked and observed what befell Odysseus,
sitting beside him and hearing his heavily burdened groaning.

Straightway he spoke to the oar-loving people of all Phaeacia:

“Hear me, Phaeacian leaders and counselors gathered around me.

Now we have filled our hearts with the feast we have equally shared here,
also the lyre that is always the rich banquet's faithful companion.

Come then, let us go outside and make trial of every
contest, so this foreign man may relate to his family later,
once he arrives at his home, by how much we surpass other people,
both in the boxing and wrestling and jumping and swiftness of running.”
Thus having spoken, he led, and the people departed behind him.

Then the herald hung up on its peg the clear-voiced lyre,
taking Demodocus' hand and conducting him out of the great hall,
leading him there on the selfsame road that the other Phaeacian
nobles had followed, intending to marvel at all the athletic games there.

There to the meeting place they went, while a crowd beyond counting
followed behind in their thousands, and many fine young men arose there.

Up came Acroneus, Ocyalus, Elatreus with him,
Nauteus and Prymneus and Anchialus and lord Eretmeus,
Ponteus, Proreus, Thoon, and young Anabesineus,
Amphialus, Polyneus’ son, whose own father was Tecton;