while in her home he had always been tended the same as a god there.

Then, when the serving women had bathed and anointed his body,
casting around him a beautiful cloak and a tunic for clothing,
out of the bath he came and went to the men at the wine feast.

Nausicaa, who received from the gods her surpassing beauty,
stood by the pillar supporting the roof that was strongly constructed;

there she beheld great Odysseus and marveled as she looked upon him.

Raising her voice, she addressed great Odysseus in winged language:

“Farewell, stranger;

and someday, when you are home in your country,
hold me in memory, since first to me you owe the price of your lifetime.”
Then resourceful Odysseus spoke and addressed her in answer:

“Lord Alcinous' daughter Nausicaa, hear what I tell you:

only may Zeus so grant it, loud-thundering husband of Hera,
that I return to my home and behold the glad day of my homecoming;

then I shall pray to you even there as I pray to a goddess,
always through all of my days, for you saved my life, gentle maiden.”
Thus did he speak, and he sat by the side of the king Alcinous.

Already portions of meat were served and the wine bowl was mixing;

then the herald approached them and led the respected singer,
lord Demodocus, honored among all the people, and sat him
there in the midst of the feasters, against the great pillar reclining.

Then resourceful Odysseus called to the herald beside him,
cutting a piece from the chine of a white-tusked boar, with a larger
part still remaining, while rich fat lay in abundance around it:

“Herald, take this meat now and place it before Demodocus,
so he may eat, and I shall show him respect though I carry my sorrow.

Singers receive from all people throughout the expanse of the earth-land
honor and reverence as their portion, because the immortal
Muse has instructed their pathways and loves every tribe of the singers.”
Thus did he speak, and the herald carried and placed it within the
hands of the hero Demodocus, who received it with joy in his spirit.

All of their hands reached out to the excellent food spread before them.

Then, when desire for food and for drinking was put from their bodies,
then resourceful Odysseus spoke to Demodocus openly:

“Lord Demodocus, I give you praise beyond all other mortals.

Either the Muse, child of Zeus, gave you teaching, or lordly Apollo,
since you correctly in order sing the Achaeans' destruction,
all they accomplished and suffered, the manifold toil of Achaeans,
just as if you were there for yourself or had heard from a witness.

Come now, change your song's pathway and sing how the wooden horse was
built by Epeius together with Pallas Athena, a cunning
trap great Odysseus took to the heights of the fortress of Trojans,
filled with the warriors who sacked Ilium's city around them.

If you recount me this story as well and in proper proportion,
then I shall speak out at once and relate to the whole of humanity
how some divinity favored you, giving you godlike singing.”
Thus did he speak, and the singer began, by a god stirred to singing,
starting the song where the Argives embarked on the well-benched vessels,
sailing away when they cast burning fire on all of the war camp,
while other men with renowned Odysseus already were sitting
there in the Trojans' place of assembly, concealed in the horse-form,
since the Trojans themselves pulled the horse to the height of the fortress.

There it remained, while the Trojans talked endlessly, never deciding,
seated around it, and three different counsels were pleasing among them:

either to split the hollowed wood with the merciless bronze blade,
or to drag it to heights and cast it below from the cliff rocks,
or let it stand as a mighty gift to appease the immortals.