also Euryalus rose, like Ares destroyer of mortals,
child of Naubolus, best in the beauty and form of his body,
after the faultless Laodamas, out of the whole of Phaeacia.

Three sons born to the blameless Alcinous also arose there:

lord Laodamas, Halius, and the godlike Clytoneus.

First they began to make trial of each in the race of the runners.

Out from the turning place was the course stretched ahead, and together
rapidly all of them flew, and the dust of the plain rose around them.

Blameless Clytoneus proved by far to be best of the runners;

just as the width of a mule-team furrow extends over fallow,
so far he came to the crowd in advance, leaving all men behind him.

Next they began to make trial of painful and wearisome wrestling;

there Euryalus defeated the best of the men in the contest.

Lord Amphialus proved himself first of the men in the long jump;

far beyond others Elatreus threw with the discus;

boxing was won by the excellent son of Alcinous, Laodamas.

Then, when they all in their hearts had taken delight in the contests,
lord Laodamas, the son of Alcinous, spoke to the others:

“Come then, friends, let us ask if the stranger possesses experience
in any contest or learned it;

in build he is not an unworthy
man, for his thighs and his calves are strong, and the arms that he carries,
massive the neck, and his strength is great;

he is not without youthful
vigor, but manifold troubles have broken him down in affliction.

Nothing is worse than the sea for reducing the strength of a mortal,
shattering even the man who is formed with tremendous endurance.”
Then Euryalus spoke to Laodamas, giving an answer:

“Lord Laodamas, what you have said is appropriate measure.

Go there yourself and challenge the stranger, addressing him openly.”
Then, when the excellent son of Alcinous heard what was spoken,
standing in front of the people, he spoke to the lord Odysseus:

“Come then, fatherly stranger, and try the athletic contests,
if you have learned one;

you likely have knowledge of contests and game-craft.

No greater glory exists for a man while he lives on the earth here
than what he gains as a work of his own strong feet and his own hands.

Come, make a trial, and scatter the cares from your heart in the contest.

Now your returning shall not be delayed for a long time, for already
launched is the ship and the men who shall travel beside you are ready.”
Then resourceful Odysseus spoke and addressed him in answer:

“Lord Laodamas, why do you urge me in mockery this way?

Cares in my heart are much closer to me than athletic contests.

Much I have suffered already and labored in manifold troubles;

now in your meeting place I am sitting and longing for homeward
travel, entreating the king and entreating all of the people.”
Then Euryalus spoke to him openly, mocking Odysseus:

“Stranger, indeed, you do not appear like a man of the contests,
such as are practiced in many events by the rest of mankind here,
rather a man who is sailing to places in ships of the many
benches, a ruler of sailors who all give attention to trading,
keeping the freight in his memory, watching the cargo and profits
seized in his greed;

you do not resemble an athlete to me here.”
Looking beneath his brows, resourceful Odysseus answered:

“Stranger, you spoke without courtesy, like an irrational mortal.

So it is true that the gods do not grant to all people together
every grace, not beauty of form and intelligence and speaking.

One mortal man may be slighter than others in bodily presence,
yet some god wreathes words with a crown all around his appearance.

People look on with delight, while never confusedly he speaks,
sweetly and modestly, shining among all the people assembled;