he saw the famous craftsman Hephaestus leaving the palace,
then made his way to the home of the widely renowned Hephaestus,
longing to lie in the love of the lovely-crowned Cytherea.

She had come newly from visiting father, the powerful son of
Cronos, and just had sat down when lord Ares entered the household,
taking her hand in his own and addressing the goddess directly:

“Come, my beloved, and lie in the bed, taking pleasure together;

lord Hephaestus is no longer at home, and I think he is now in
Lemnos, among the Sintians there with their wild-sounding language.”
Thus did he speak, and the thought of lying beside him was welcome.

Both of them went to the bed and lay down, while around them descended
all of the chains cleverly made by Hephaestus, the god of invention;

neither could move any limb or raise up the weight of a body.

Then they discovered the truth, that no avenue now could release them.

Close to them came the famous and powerfully armed Hephaestus,
turning around on his road before coming to Lemnos the island;

Helios watched for the god and told him the whole of the story.

Into his palace he went with his heart weighed down by the sorrow;

there in the gateway he stood, and terrible anger possessed him.

Crying aloud in a terrible voice, he called all the gods there:

“Father Zeus, and you other divinities blessed and deathless,
come here and look at a laughable thing that is wholly unbearable,
how Aphrodite, the daughter of Zeus, has always dishonored
me for my lameness and loves Ares, destroyer of people,
since he is handsome and straight in his legs, while I was created
crippled in body.

Who else bears the blame?

No one except my
parents together;

I wish they had never at all brought me forth here.

Look at them now, as they lie with each other in love and are sleeping
there in my own marriage bed, while the sight makes my heart eaten by sorrow.

Yet I do not think they shall wish to remain there lying together,
even a moment, although they are deeply in love with each other;

soon they shall lose the desire to sleep.

Yet the snare and the bindings
hold them until her own father pays back every one of the bride-gifts,
all I provided him there for this dog-eyed daughter of his house,
beautiful though she may be, for she holds not her heart within measure.”
Thus did he speak, and the gods came gathering into the bronze-floored
palace;

Poseidon arrived, great god who encircles the earth-land;

Hermes the runner arrived, and the far-working lordly Apollo.

Yet all the goddesses stayed in their homes from a sense of the shame there.

Gods who provide all blessings were standing together in doorways;

then in the blessed gods rose laughter that never could be quenched,
seeing the clever device of Hephaestus, the god of invention.

Then one god would glance at his neighbor and speak in this manner:

“Wrongdoing does not prosper;

the slow one captures the swift one.

See how Hephaestus, although he is slow, has captured god Ares,
fleetest of all of the gods who inhabit the heights of Olympus,
lame though he is, by his craft.

Now the fine for adultery waits him.”
Thus did the gods speak words in this manner between one another.

Then lord Apollo, the son of great Zeus, spoke out to lord Hermes:

“Hermes, son of great Zeus, giving good things and guiding the traveler,
would you be willing, restrained under chains that were heavy and mighty,
there in the bed to lie close beside golden Aphrodite?”
Then the guide and the slayer of Argus replied to Apollo:

“If that were only to happen, far-shooting lordly Apollo!

Let even thrice the innumerable number of bindings
hold me, and all of you gods look on, with the goddesses also;