Show me the town, and give me a rag to throw around me —
if perhaps you had some wrapping-cloth for the linen when you came.

And may the gods grant you all your heart desires:

a husband and a house — and may they add like-mindedness,
the good kind.

For nothing is stronger or better than that:

when two who think alike keep house together,
a man and his wife — much grief to their ill-wishers,
joy to their friends;

and they themselves know it best."
Then white-armed Nausicaa answered him:

"Stranger — since you seem neither base nor witless a man —
it is Olympian Zeus himself who deals out fortune to mankind,
to good and bad, to each one as he wills;

and to you, I suppose, he gave this lot, and you must bear it, come what may.

But now, since you have come to our city and our land,
you shall not want for clothing, nor for anything else
that is owed a hard-worn suppliant when he comes.

I will show you the town, and tell you the name of the people.

The Phaeacians hold this city and this land,
and I am the daughter of great-hearted Alcinous,
on whom the strength and power of the Phaeacians hang."
She spoke, and called to her fair-braided handmaids:

"Stand still, you girls!

Where are you running at the sight of a man?

You cannot think he is one of an enemy people?

There is no living mortal, and there will be none,
who could come bearing war into the land
of the Phaeacian men.

For we are very dear to the deathless ones,
and we live apart, in the much-surging sea,
at the world's edge, and no other mortals mix with us.

No — this is some poor wanderer come here astray,
whom we must care for now.

From Zeus they come, all of them,
strangers and beggars;

and a gift, though small, is dear.

Come, girls:

give the stranger food and drink,
and bathe him in the river, where there is shelter from the wind."
So she spoke;

and they stood, and called to one another,
and they set Odysseus down in the sheltered place, as she commanded —
Nausicaa, daughter of great-hearted Alcinous —
and laid a mantle and a tunic by him for clothing,
and gave him soft olive oil in the golden flask,
and urged him to bathe in the streams of the river.

Then noble Odysseus spoke among the handmaids:

"Stand off there, girls, at a distance, so that I myself
may wash the brine from my shoulders, and rub myself
with oil:

it is long indeed since oil came near my skin.

But I will not bathe in front of you.

I would be ashamed
to stand naked among fair-braided girls."
So he spoke;

and they went apart, and told the girl.

And noble Odysseus washed his body in the river,
sluicing off the brine that caked his back and broad shoulders,
and scrubbed from his head the salt-scurf of the barren sea.

And when he had washed all over, and rubbed himself with oil,
and put on the clothes the unwed girl had given him,
then Athena, born of Zeus, made him
taller to look at, and broader, and down from his head
she made the locks flow in curls, like the hyacinth flower.

As when a man lays gold over silver — a craftsman
whom Hephaestus and Pallas Athena have taught
art of every kind, and he finishes works full of grace —
so she poured grace over his head and shoulders.

Then he went apart and sat on the shingle of the sea,
shining with beauty and grace.

And the girl gazed at him,
and spoke among her fair-braided handmaids:

"Listen, my white-armed girls, while I say something.

Not against the will of all the gods who hold Olympus
does this man come among the godlike Phaeacians.

Before, I confess, he seemed to me a sorry sight;

now he is like the gods who hold wide heaven.

If only such a man might be called my husband,
living here — if only it pleased him to stay!

But come, girls: