At once Dawn came on her fair throne, and woke
Nausicaa of the lovely robe; and she wondered at her dream
and went through the house to tell her parents,
her dear father and mother. She found them within:
her mother sat at the hearth with her attendant women,
spinning yarn dyed sea-purple; her father she met
at the door, on his way out to join the famous kings
in council, where the lordly Phaeacians called him.
She stood close to her dear father and said:
"Papa dear, won't you make ready a wagon for me,
the high one with the good wheels, so I can take the fine clothes
to the river for washing, that lie about me dirty?
And for you too it is only proper, when you sit among the first men
debating counsels, to have clean clothing on your body.
And five dear sons have been born to you in these halls —
two married, and three flourishing bachelors —
and they are always wanting fresh-washed clothes to wear
when they go to the dancing. All this is on my mind."
So she spoke: she was shy of naming ripe marriage
to her dear father. But he saw it all, and answered:
"I do not grudge you the mules, child, or anything else.
Go: the slaves will make ready a wagon for you,
the high one with the good wheels, fitted with its top-rack."
So saying he called to the slaves, and they obeyed.
Outside, they made ready the smooth-running mule wagon
and led the mules under and yoked them to it;
and the girl brought the shining clothing from her room
and laid it in the polished wagon,
and her mother packed a box with heartening food
of every kind — put in delicacies, and poured wine
in a goatskin bag; and the girl climbed up on the wagon.
And she gave her soft olive oil in a golden flask,
so she and her attendant women might anoint themselves after bathing.
And she took up the whip and the glossy reins
and whipped the mules to a run; and there was a clatter of hooves,
and they strained on without slackening, carrying the clothes and her —
not alone: her handmaids went along beside her.

And when they came to the beautiful stream of the river,
where the washing-pools never fail — plenty of clear water
welling up through and running over, to clean the dirtiest things —
there they loosed the mules from under the wagon
and shooed them along the eddying river
to graze the honey-sweet water-grass; and they lifted the clothes
from the wagon in armfuls and carried them into the dark water,
and trod them briskly in the trenches, racing one another.
And when they had washed and rinsed away all the dirt,
they spread everything out in rows along the shingle of the sea,
where the waves washed the pebbles cleanest against the shore.
And when they had bathed and rubbed themselves richly with oil,
they took their meal by the banks of the river
and waited for the clothes to dry in the shining of the sun.
And when she and her slave-women had had their joy of food,
they threw off their head-veils and played at ball,
and white-armed Nausicaa led them in the singing.
As Artemis the arrow-pourer goes down the mountains,
down long Taygetus or Erymanthus,
delighting in the boars and the running deer,
and with her the nymphs, daughters of aegis-bearing Zeus,
play across the wild country, and Leto's heart is glad,
for she carries her head and brow above them all
and is known at once, though all of them are beautiful:
so the unwed girl outshone her handmaids.