Odyssey — Book 6

Nausicaa at the river; the naked stranger; the road to the city.

So he slept there, much-enduring noble Odysseus,
overcome with sleep and weariness. But Athena
went her way to the land and city of the Phaeacian men,
who once, in years past, lived in spacious Hypereia,
near the Cyclopes, men of overweening pride,
who kept raiding them, and were the stronger in force.
From there godlike Nausithous had uprooted them and led them,
and settled them in Scheria, far from men who eat bread,
and drove a wall around the city, and built houses,
and made temples for the gods, and divided out the plowlands.
But he long since had gone down to Hades, broken by fate,
and now Alcinous ruled, his counsels known from the gods.
To his house went the goddess, gray-eyed Athena,
devising the homecoming of great-hearted Odysseus.
She went into the richly-worked chamber where a girl
lay sleeping, like the immortals in build and beauty:
Nausicaa, daughter of great-hearted Alcinous;
and by her two handmaids, with beauty from the Graces,
one at each doorpost; and the shining doors were shut.
Like a breath of wind she swept to the girl's bed
and stood above her head, and spoke to her,
in the likeness of the daughter of Dymas, famed for ships,
a girl her own age, and dear to her heart.
In her likeness gray-eyed Athena said:
"Nausicaa, how did your mother bear so careless a girl?
Your shining clothes lie there uncared-for —
and your wedding is near, when you must wear beautiful things
yourself, and provide them for those who lead you in procession:
it is from things like these that a good name goes up
among the people, and a father and honored mother are glad.
Come, let us go washing at the showing of dawn:
I will come with you and work beside you, so you may be ready
the sooner — for truly not much longer will you be unwed:
already the best men through all the land of the Phaeacians
are wooing you — and your own line is theirs.
Come then: press your famous father, before the dawn,
to make ready the mules and a wagon to carry
the sashes and the robes and the shining coverlets.
And for yourself, too, it is far more fitting so than going
on foot: the washing-pools are a long way from the city."
So speaking, gray-eyed Athena went away
to Olympus, where they say the seat of the gods stands fast
forever: not shaken by winds, never soaked
by rain, nor does snow come near it, but clear sky
spreads cloudless there, and a white radiance runs over it;
in that place the blessed gods take pleasure all their days.
There the gray-eyed one went, when she had counseled the girl.