But white-armed Nausicaa thought of one thing more:

she folded the clothes and stowed them in the beautiful wagon,
and yoked the strong-hoofed mules, and mounted herself,
and called Odysseus on, and spoke a word, and named him:

"Up now, stranger, and we go to the city, so I may send you
to the house of my wise father — where, I promise you,
you will meet the best men of all the Phaeacians.

Only do exactly this — you do not seem to me short of sense.

While we are passing the fields and the works of men,
walk with the handmaids, behind the mules and wagon,
briskly;

I will lead the way.

But when we are about to enter the city — a high wall rings it,
and a beautiful harbor lies on either side of the town,
with a narrow causeway in;

and the curved ships are drawn up
along the road, for every man has his own slip there;

and there is the gathering-place around Poseidon's fine precinct,
fitted with quarried stones set deep in the earth;

and there men see to the tackle of their black ships,
the cables and the sails, and fine down their oars —
for the Phaeacians care nothing for the bow or the quiver,
but for masts, and ships' oars, and the trim ships themselves,
in which they delight as they cross the gray salt sea —
it is their ugly talk I shrink from:

someone behind my back
might sneer;

there are insolent men enough in the town;

and one of the meaner sort, meeting us, might say:

'Who is this following Nausicaa — this tall handsome
stranger?

Where did she find him?

A husband for her, no doubt!

Some castaway she has taken up, off his ship,
a man from far parts — since nobody lives near us;

or some god, long prayed-for, come down to her
out of heaven in answer, and hers he will be all her days!

Better so, if she has gone out and found herself a husband
from elsewhere — since she scorns her own, here in the land,
the Phaeacians, though many fine men are wooing her!'
So they will say, and it would be a reproach against me.

And I would blame another girl who did such things myself:

who, against the will of her dear father and mother living,
kept company with men before the day of open marriage.

So, stranger, mark my word quickly, and you will win
escort and homecoming from my father soonest.

You will find a shining grove of Athena near the road —
poplars;

a spring wells up in it;

a meadow lies around it.

There is my father's park there, and his flourishing orchard,
as far from the city as a man's shout carries.

Sit down there and wait a while, until we
have entered the town and reached my father's house.

But when you judge that we have reached the house,
then go into the city of the Phaeacians, and ask
for the house of my father, great-hearted Alcinous.

It is easily known:

a little child could lead you —
a baby;

for the houses of the Phaeacians are not built
anything like it — such is the house of the hero
Alcinous.

And once the buildings and the court have hidden you,
go quickly straight through the great hall, until you come
to my mother.

She sits at the hearth in the light of the fire,
spinning yarn dyed sea-purple — a wonder to see —
leaning against a pillar, and her slave-women sit behind her.

And there my father's chair is tilted close to hers,
where he sits and drinks his wine like an immortal.

Pass him by, and throw your arms around the knees
of my mother — if you would see your day of homecoming
with rejoicing, and quickly, though you come from very far.

If she once takes kindly thought for you in her heart,
then there is hope you will see your own people, and come
to your well-built house and your own fatherland."
So speaking she touched the mules with the shining whip,
and they quickly left the flowing river behind.