and upon it there were twelve brooches
all of pure gold, fitted close with well-curved clasps in order.

And for Eurymachus at once his man brought a cunning-wrought necklace,
golden, threaded with amber beads that shone like the sun there.

Then for Eurydamas two serving-men brought a pair of earrings,
triple-clustered like mulberries;

and much grace flashed from them brightly.

Then out of the house of lord Peisander, Polyctor’s son there,
a henchman brought a necklet, a marvel most lovely to look on.

And then one after another Achaeans brought some fair gift there.

Then up to her upper chamber went that radiant queen among women,
and with her the serving-women bore the beautiful gifts there.

But the men turned then to the dance and the song of desire and delighting,
and took their pleasure, awaiting the coming of evening upon them.

And upon them, delighting themselves, came the black dusk of evening.

Straightway they set up three braziers there inside the great hall,
so they might give them light, and around them they placed splintered firewood,
dry from long before, well seasoned, newly split with the bronze blade,
and among it they mingled pine torches;

and turn upon turn then
the slave-women of long-enduring Odysseus kept them burning.

Then to the women himself spoke resourceful Odysseus:

“Slave-women of Odysseus, your lord long absent and far off,
go to the chamber where our reverend queen has her dwelling;

sit there beside her and twist the distaff, and cheer her spirit,
sitting within her room, or card out the wool with your own hands.

I for my part will furnish light for all of these men here present.

Even if they should choose to wait for Dawn on her fair throne rising,
still they shall not wear me down;

for I am most patient in hardship.”
So he spoke, and they laughed aloud, glancing at one another.

Then fair-cheeked Melantho upbraided him harshly and shamelessly,
she whom Dolios fathered, but noble Penelope reared her,
cherishing her as a child, and gave her playthings to please her.

Yet for all that she never took Penelope's sorrow to heart, no,
but with Eurymachus lay, and loved him well as a lover.

She now addressed Odysseus with scornful and taunting reproaches:

“Wretched stranger, surely your wits have been wholly bewildered.

You will not go and sleep in the smithy after entering,
nor perhaps in some common shelter, but here you are talking
boldly among all these men in your overconfident spirit,
and there is no fear in your heart.

Is wine now mastering
all of your mind, or is your thinking always thus foolish,
babbling empty words?

Are you lightheaded now because lately
you defeated Irus, that vagabond beggar?

Take care lest another,
better than Irus, quickly arise, who with powerful fists there
striking about your head may drive you blood-spattered from the house out.”
Then with a dark glance under his brows wise Odysseus answered:

“Soon I will tell Telemachus, bitch, what things you are saying,
going to him there, so that he may hack you limb from limb instantly.”
Thus he spoke, and with words he scattered the women in terror.

Off through the hall they went, and the limbs of each one were loosened
by their fear, for they thought that in truth he had spoken in earnest.

But he stood by the blazing torches that flared up in brightness,
watching them all;

and within him his heart was pondering other
things in his inmost mind, and those were not left unaccomplished.

Yet Athena did not at all let the haughty suitors refrain from
hurtful abuse that cuts to the heart, so that still more sharply
grief might sink in the heart of Odysseus, son of Laertes.

Then among them Eurymachus, Polybus' son, began speaking,
mocking Odysseus, and stirred up laughter among his companions: