“Stranger, if your heart prompts you and your proud spirit drives you
to beat this fellow off, then fear no one else of the Achaeans.

Whoever strikes you will have many to fight against after.

I am your host, and the kings give praise and approval,
Antinous and Eurymachus, men both sound in understanding.”
So he spoke, and all of them gave assent;

then Odysseus
girded his rags about his loins, and his thighs were revealed there,
shapely and great, and his broad shoulders showed to their sight then,
with his chest and his sturdy arms;

and Athena stood near him
and made the limbs more massive for the shepherd of the people.

Then all the suitors were struck with amazement beyond measure,
and thus would a man look over and say to another beside him:

“Soon Irus will have drawn on himself a ruin past bearing,
such is the thigh that the old man shows from beneath his tatters.”
So they spoke, and for Irus his heart was stirred into anguish.

Yet even so the attendants, by force, came up and girded him,
terrified as he was;

and the flesh on his limbs shook about him.

But Antinous rebuked him, and spoke and addressed him by name:

“Now may you neither exist, you loud ox, nor ever have been born,
if you indeed are trembling and fear this man so dreadfully,
an old man, worn down by the wretched affliction upon him.

But I will tell you this, and indeed it shall be accomplished:

if this man defeats you and proves himself stronger than you are,
I will send you away to the mainland, set in a black ship,
to King Echetus, the bane and destroyer of all mortal people,
who with pitiless bronze will cut away your nose and your ears there,
and tear out your genitals, and give them raw for the dogs to divide.”
So he spoke, and the trembling seized on his limbs still more strongly.

Then they led him into the midst, and both of them lifted their hands up.

Then much-enduring noble Odysseus pondered deeply,
whether to strike him so that his life would leave him there as he fell down,
or else to deal him a lighter blow and stretch him there on the ground out.

As he considered, this course appeared to him more advantageous:

to strike him lightly, so the Achaeans would not perceive him.

Then when they had both raised guard, Irus struck at the right shoulder,
but he hit his neck beneath the ear, and the bones within it
he crushed inward;

and instantly crimson blood came into his mouth there,
and he fell in the dust with a bleat, and he knocked his teeth together,
kicking the ground with his feet;

and the proud and lordly suitors
lifted their hands and died of laughter;

but then great Odysseus
dragged him out through the forecourt doorway, clutching his foot there,
till he came to the yard and the gates of the roofed colonnade there;

there he sat him down propped up by the fence of the courtyard,
and placed in his hand a staff, and speaking addressed him in winged words:

“Sit there now, and keep away the pigs and the dogs from here,
and do not you be the master of strangers and beggars any longer,
vile as you are, lest some greater evil and worse one befall you.”
So he spoke, and cast round his shoulders the ugly beggar's satchel,
thickly patched and worn, and a twisted cord was its shoulder-strap.

Then back to the threshold he went and sat himself down;

they within doors
went back in, laughing with pleasure, and greeted him then with their speeches:

“May Zeus grant to you, stranger, and all the other immortals,
whatever you most desire, whatever is dearest unto your spirit,
since you have made that insatiable rover stop begging
through all the land;

for soon we shall send him off to the mainland,
to King Echetus, the bane and destroyer of all mortal people.”
So they spoke, and noble Odysseus rejoiced in the omen of it.