Then Antinous set by his side a great goat's paunch for him,
full of fat and of blood;

and then Amphinomus lifted
two loaves out of the basket and set them there down beside him,
and pledged him in a golden cup, and speaking addressed him:

“Health to you, father and stranger;

may wealth be yours hereafter,
though now for the present you are held fast in many afflictions.”
Then resourceful Odysseus in answer spoke unto him thus:

“Amphinomus, indeed you seem to me to be very discerning;

so was the father you spring from, for I have heard his good glory,
Nisus of Dulichium, that he was noble and wealthy;

they say you were born from him, and you look like a thoughtful man too.

Therefore I will tell you this;

take heed and listen unto me.

Nothing more helpless than man does the earth ever foster,
of all things whatsoever that breathe and move on the earth's surface.

For he says that never hereafter will evil come on him,
while the gods grant him excellence and vigor in his knees still;

but whenever at last the blessed gods bring grievous things on him,
even these he endures, unwilling, with a patient spirit.

For such is the mind of men who dwell upon the face of the earth here,
as is the day that the father of gods and of men brings upon them.

For I too once expected to be prosperous among men,
but I did many reckless deeds, yielding to force and to vigor,
trusting in my own father and trusting in my own brothers.

Therefore let not any man ever at all be lawless,
but in silence let him accept whatever gifts the gods grant him.

Such are the reckless designs that I see these suitors contriving,
wasting the substance away and dishonoring the lawful wife
of a man who, I say, will not be far from his friends and his fatherland
much longer, but is very near.

Yet may some god lead you homeward,
and may you not encounter that man when he comes to his household,
whenever he returns again to the land of his own dear fathers.

For I do not think that without blood they will part from each other,
that man and the suitors, when once he comes under his roof-tree.”
So he spoke, and after a libation drank the honey-sweet wine there,
then placed the cup once more in the hands of the marshal of people.

But he went through the hall with his heart in sorrow and trouble,
nodding his head;

for his spirit indeed was foreseeing destruction.

Yet not even so did he flee from fate;

for Athena bound him
there to be overpowered by the hands and spear of Telemachus.

Back again then he went and sat on the chair he had left there.

Then into the mind of her put the gray-eyed goddess Athena,
into the mind of Icarius' daughter, wise Penelope,
to appear before the suitors, so she might most fully expand
so she might swell the proud hearts of the suitors, and be held in honor
more in the eyes of her husband and son than ever before then.

Then she laughed an empty laugh, and spoke a word and named her:

“Eurynome, my heart is longing, as never it longed before now,
to appear to the suitors, hateful though they are to me wholly;

and I would speak a word to my son, for that would be better:

he must not always consort with the arrogant-hearted suitors,
men who speak him fair to his face, but behind him imagine evil.”
Then again Eurynome the housekeeper answered and told her:

“Yes indeed, dear child, all this that you have said is well spoken.

Go now, and speak to your son, and do not conceal it from him there,
when you have washed your skin and anointed the cheeks of your face first.

Do not go with your countenance thus all befouled round about there
with tears, since it is worse to go on in unceasing grieving forever.