“Hear me, suitors who seek the hand of our far-famed lady,
so I may say what the heart in my breast is bidding me utter.

Not without god has this fellow come here to Odysseus' household.

Yet to my mind the bright gleam of the torches is shining
straight from his head, since there is no hair there, not even the faintest.”
So he spoke, and then he addressed city-sacking Odysseus:

“Stranger, would you be willing to work for hire, if I took you
out to the edge of my fields?

Your wages will surely suffice there.

You could gather stones for the fences and plant the tall trees there.

There I would furnish you bread in abundance all through the year round,
clothe you with garments to wear, and give shoes to bind on your feet too.

But since now you have learned such evil ways, you will not be willing
to go about doing work, but prefer to skulk through the city,
begging, so you may provide for your insatiable belly.”
Then with a ready reply resourceful Odysseus answered:

“Eurymachus, if only a contest in labor might come now
between us two in the season of spring, when the days become longer,
out in the grassland, where I should hold in my hands a well-curved scythe,
and you should hold one as well, so we might make trial of labor,
fasting until deep dusk, with the grass still lying before us;

or if there should be oxen to drive, and they were the very best kind,
tawny and large, both full-fed on grass and both in their prime there,
equal in age and in pull, and their strength not slight nor exhausted,
and there should be four-acre tilth, with the soil crumbling under
plowshare, then you would see whether I could draw a furrow straight through.

Or if again the son of Cronos should stir up a battle
somewhere today, and I had a shield and a pair of spears with me
and a helmet all bronze, close-fitted around both my temples,
then you would see me among the first men joined in the fighting,
nor would you mockingly speak of this belly of mine any longer.

But you are violently insolent, and your spirit is pitiless;

and somehow you imagine that you are mighty and powerful,
because you live among only a few, and they are not worthy.

But if Odysseus should come and return to his fatherland country,
then for you those doors, though indeed they are broad, all too quickly
would become narrow in flight through the forecourt out to the gateway.”
Thus he spoke, and Eurymachus felt even greater anger within him.

Then with a dark glance under his brows he addressed him and answered:

“Ah, miserable man, very soon I will bring you to ruin outright
for these words that you boldly proclaim among all of these people,
nor is there any fear in your heart.

Is wine now mastering
all of your wits, or is your mind always this sort of foolish,
since you speak empty words?

Are you giddy because you bested Irus?”
So he spoke, and seized up a stool;

but noble Odysseus
crouched at the knees of Amphinomos, lord from Dulichion,
fearing Eurymachus;

so he struck the cupbearer's right hand,
and the wine-jug clattered to earth with a booming sound as it fell there.

Groaning aloud, the man pitched on his back in the dust of the floor there.

Then all the suitors cried out through the shadowy halls in confusion,
and thus would one man speak, glancing across at another beside him:

“If only that stranger had perished in roaming somewhere on another shore
ere he came here;

then he would not have stirred up so mighty an uproar.

Now we are wrangling over beggars, and never a pleasure in feasting
will there be from a noble banquet, since what is baser is winning.”
Then among them the hallowed strength of Telemachus answered and spoke out:

“Strange men, you are mad, and no longer conceal in your spirits
food that you ate and the drink that you drank;