For now indeed your son is of such an age as you chiefly
prayed to the deathless gods that you might behold him bearded.”
Then resourceful Penelope answered her once again, saying:

“Eurynome, do not urge me to this, though kindly you mean it,
to wash my skin and to anoint myself with the oil of gladness.

For the gods who possess Olympus have ruined the beauty
that once was mine, from the day when he sailed in the hollow ships from me.

But bid Autonoe and Hippodameia to come here
and attend me, so they may stand beside me here in the chamber;

for I will not go among men all alone;

I am ashamed to.”
So then she spoke, and the old woman went through the hall of the manor,
bearing the word to the women and urging them all to come to her.

Then the gray-eyed goddess Athena thought upon something further:

over the daughter of Icarius she poured a sweet slumber;

and she slept, reclining there, and all her limbs were loosened
there on the couch;

and meanwhile the bright among goddesses gave her
deathless gifts, so the Achaeans might gaze on her there in wonder.

First with ambrosial unguent she cleansed her beautiful countenance,
such as well-garlanded Cythereia herself there
anoints herself with whenever she goes to the Graces’ desireful dancing.

And she made her seem taller and fuller to look upon also,
and she made her more white than ivory newly sawn and polished.

So having wrought all this, the bright among goddesses left there.

Then from the hall came the white-armed handmaids drawing near her,
making a stir as they came;

and sweet sleep released her then also.

Then with her hands she wiped her cheeks, and speaking she said to them:

“Surely a very soft trance enfolded me round in my sorrow.

If only holy Artemis would grant me a death just as gentle
instantly now, so no longer lamenting down in my spirit
I might wear out my life while yearning after my dear husband,
every virtue of his, since he was preeminent among Achaeans.”
So saying, she came down from her upper chamber so silent,
not all alone;

with her there followed also two of her handmaids.

But when she came to the suitors, that radiant queen among women,
she stood beside the pillar that held the strongly built roofing,
lifting the shining veil and holding it there by her cheeks with her hands;

and on either side a faithful handmaid stood beside her.

Then there on the spot their knees were unstrung, and their hearts were enchanted
with desire, and each one prayed that he might lie down by her bedside.

Then she addressed Telemachus, her own beloved son, saying:

“Telemachus, your mind is no longer steadfast, nor your thinking.

Being still but a child, you held more prudent thoughts in your spirit;

now, when at last you are grown and come to the measure of manhood,
so that some stranger who looked on your stature and beauty
might say you were born as the son of some prosperous great man,
now your mind and your thought are no longer sound as they should be.

What is this deed that has happened here in the halls of the manor?

You allowed that stranger to be so shamefully handled before you.

How now, if some stranger who sat in our house as a suppliant
should suffer thus from disastrous rough treatment and torment?

On you would shame and reproach among all men surely be fallen.”
Then wise Telemachus answered her openly, saying in turn:

“My mother, truly I do not resent you for being angry.

Yet I perceive in my heart and know every matter before me,
both the better and worse;

but before this I was only a child still.

Yet I cannot in all things think everything through with good judgment;

for these men sitting beside me bewilder me, one after another,
plotting out evil;

and there are no helpers who stand at my side here.