Then there came a common beggar who begged through the city,
ranging through Ithaca town, and his greedy gut marked him,
ravenous always to eat and to drink without ceasing;

yet there was no strength in him, no force, though huge to look on.

Arnaeus was the name that his noble mother had given
him from his birth;

but all the young men called him Irus,
since he would carry a message whenever one told him.

He came and began to drive Odysseus out of his own house,
and reviling him there he addressed him in winged words:

“Move from the doorway, old man, lest soon by the foot you be dragged off.

Do you not see that they all are winking and signaling to me,
telling me I should drag you?

Yet even so I am ashamed to.

Up then, before our dispute and our hands come to fighting.”
Then with a lowering glance wise Odysseus answered him:

“Strange man, I do you no harm at all, nor say anything evil,
nor do I grudge your receiving, though much may be given you.

This threshold here will hold us both, and there is no reason
you should envy another man’s share;

you seem but a wanderer
just as I am, and the gods are the givers of fortune.

Yet do not challenge me overmuch with your hands, lest you rouse me;

old though I am, I might smear your chest and your lips over
all with blood;

and for me there would even be greater peace then
on the morrow, for I do not think you would come back here
ever again to the hall of Laertes’ son Odysseus.”
Then in his anger the vagabond Irus answered him:

“Oh for shame, how the glutton runs on with his rolling chatter,
like some old crone by her oven;

I could devise him a harsh fate,
striking with both of my hands, and send all his teeth to the ground there,
out of his jaws, like the teeth of a sow that ravages cropland.

Gird yourself now, so all of these men may know us in battle.

How could you ever fight with a man who is younger than you?”
So the two of them there before the towering doors of the courtyard
stood on the polished threshold and faced one another in fury.

Then the holy strength of Antinous noticed the two men,
and he laughed out sweetly and spoke among all the suitors:

“Friends, no such thing as this has ever befallen before us,
such delight as the god has brought to this house for our pleasure.

Here are the stranger and Irus disputing together
to fight with their hands;

come, let us bring them together quickly.”
So he spoke, and all of them sprang to their feet with laughter,
and they gathered around the two beggars dressed in vile rags.

Then among them Antinous spoke, son of Eupeithes:

“Hear me, proud suitors, so I may say what is in my thinking.

There at the fire lie paunches of goats, which for supper
we set down after filling with fat and with dark blood.

Whichever of these two men wins and proves the better fighter,
let him arise and choose for himself whichever he wishes.

Ever thereafter he shall dine in our company with feasting,
nor will we let any other beggar come in here asking.”
So spoke Antinous, and his saying was pleasing to all of them.

Then resourceful Odysseus spoke among them with crafty intention:

“Friends, there is no way for an older man to fight with a younger,
one who is crushed down by suffering;

yet this accursed belly
urges me on, worker of evil, to yield to his blows and be mastered.

Come then, now swear to me all of you a binding oath here,
that no man, favoring Irus, will strike me a foul stroke
with his heavy hand and by force overpower me for his sake.”
So he spoke, and all of them swore as he had commanded.

But when they had sworn the oath and brought it wholly to completion,
then in his turn the holy strength of Telemachus answered: