Yet the affair of the stranger and Irus did not turn out
by the suitors’ wish, for in strength that man was the better.

If only, Father Zeus and Athena and lord Apollo,
so in our halls these suitors might droop their heads in defeat now,
some in the court-yard lying, and some inside in the dwelling,
and the limbs of each one be loosed, as now for that Irus
sitting there at the court-yard gate he nods with his head there
and is like a drunken man, unable to stand on his feet firm.

nor can he stand upright on his feet, nor make his way homeward,
home by whatever road his returning lies, since his limbs have gone slack now.”
So in this way they spoke such words there one to another together.

Then with words Eurymachus answered prudent Penelope:

“Daughter of Icarius, wise-minded queen Penelope,
if all Achaean men through Jasonian Argos should see you,
even more suitors than these would feast in your halls from morning,
since you surpass all women by far in beauty and stature,
and in the good strong sense and understanding within you.”
Then in return to him prudent Penelope answered:

“Eurymachus, surely my worth and my beauty of figure
the immortals destroyed when the Argives embarked against Ilium,
and among them my husband Odysseus went sailing also.

If he came back again and took thought for the life that is mine here,
greater then would my glory be, and fairer also in this way.

But now I mourn, for the god has driven so many griefs on me.

Truly when he set out, leaving behind his fatherland country,
he took my right hand fast by the wrist and spoke these words to me:

“Wife, I do not suppose the well-greaved Achaeans
all will return from Troy to their homes unscathed and unharmed there.

For they say the Trojans themselves are warriors in battle,
both men who cast the spear and men who draw the bowstring,
and riders mounted upon swift-footed horses, who quickly
bring to decision the great contention of level war.

Therefore I do not know if some god will send me back homeward,
or if there within Troy I shall fall;

but let all here be your care now.

Be mindful there in the halls of my father and also my mother,
just as now, or even more, while I am absent and far off.

But whenever at last you see our son with beard on his chin grown,
marry whatever man you desire, and leave your own household.”
So he spoke in that way, and now all these things are fulfilled here.

There shall come a night when hateful marriage will face me and find me,
ruined woman that I am, from whom Zeus has taken prosperity.

But this terrible grief now comes on my heart and my spirit:

this is not how in former times the suitors behaved ever.

Men who are eager to court some noble woman and daughter
of a rich man, and strive with one another to win her,
those men bring in their own cattle and their stout sheep for slaughter,
making a feast for the girl’s own friends, and they give splendid gifts too;

they do not eat up another man’s livelihood free and unpurchased.”
So she spoke, and much-enduring noble Odysseus rejoiced there,
because she drew gifts out from them while bewitching their spirits
with her gentle words, though her mind was intent on other things wholly.

Then again Antinous spoke to her, son of Eupeithes:

“Daughter of Icarius, wise-minded queen Penelope,
whatever Achaean here may desire to bring gifts to you,
take them;

for it is not seemly to refuse what is given.

But we will not go off to our work, nor elsewhere at all, lady,
not before you marry that Achaean who proves the best of us.”
Thus spoke Antinous, and his saying was pleasing to all of them there.

Then each man sent out his herald to carry and fetch him a gift there.

For Antinous his man brought in a great and beautiful robe there,
richly embroidered;