then he sprang to his feet, and put off the sharp sword from his shoulder.

First he set up the axes, after he dug out a trench there,
one long trench for them all, and he brought them true to the line there,
and stamped the earth firm round about them.

Wonder seized all men
who looked on, seeing how straight he had set them, though never before then
had he seen it.

Then he went to the threshold and tested the bow there.

Thrice he shook it, eager in spirit to draw it and bend it;

thrice his strength gave way, though still in his heart he was hoping
to string the cord on the bow and shoot through the iron.

And by the fourth pull now he would have strung it by force as he drew it,
but Odysseus signaled no, and restrained him despite his desire there.

Then the sacred strength of Telemachus spoke among them again:

“Ah me, surely I shall be a weakling and coward hereafter,
or else I am too young as yet, and still do not trust in
these hands of mine to defend myself from a man who assails me.

Come then, you who are stronger in strength by far than I am now,
test the bow, and let us bring this contest through to completion.”
So he spoke, and laid the bow away from himself on the ground there,
leaning it down by the closely joined panels, polished and handsome;

and he set the swift arrow against the fair-curved door-hook beside it,
then sat himself back again on the chair from which he had risen.

Then Antinous spoke among them, the son of Eupeithes:

“Rise in due order, companions, each one from left hand to right hand,
starting there from the place where the wine-pourer begins his service.”
So spoke Antinous, and his word was pleasing to all of them.

First then Leodes rose up, the son of Oenops, among them,
who was their reader of rites, and he always sat by the mixing-bowl,
deepest in the recess;

to him alone their reckless behavior
was hateful, and he was indignant with all of the suitors.

He then first took up in his hands the bow and the swift arrow.

Going then to the threshold he stood there and tested the bowstring,
but he could not string it;

before that, his hands as he pulled it,
soft and uncallused, grew weary;

and then to the suitors he said this:

“Friends, I cannot string it.

Let some other one take it and try now.

Many great men will this bow bereave of spirit and life-breath;

since indeed it is far better to die than continue living
after we fail in the thing for whose sake we are gathered together
here every day, still waiting and hoping through all of the daylight.

Now some man among us may hope in his heart and be eager
to marry Penelope, spouse of Odysseus the hero.

But when he has tested this bow and seen what it truly is like then,
let him go woo some other Achaean woman in fair robes.

let him seek her with bride-gifts and suing;

and afterward she may
marry the man who offers the most and comes as her fortune.”
So then he spoke, and he set his bow away from his own hands,
leaning it down by the well-planed boards that were fitted together,
and there he propped the swift arrow close by the beautiful door-hook,
then once more he sat on the chair from which he had arisen.

But Antinous scolded him harshly and spoke out and named him:

“Leodes, what sort of a word has fled past the fence of your teeth there,
dreadful and hard to endure;

I am angered to hear it spoken.

Is this bow truly to rob our best men of courage and life-breath
only because you yourself are unable to bend it and string it?

Surely your honored mother did not bear you to be such a man
as could become a drawer of bows and a shooter of arrows;

no, but the rest of the splendid suitors will string it quickly.”
So he spoke, and he gave command to Melanthius, goatherd of goats: