Then in her mind the goddess set it, gray-eyed Pallas Athena,
in Icarius’ daughter, wise-minded Penelope’s spirit,
to set before the suitors the bow and the pale gray iron
there in Odysseus’ hall, for the trial and first of the bloodshed.

Up she went on the high stairway of her own house climbing,
and in her thick strong hand she took the curved key of the chamber,
lovely, of bronze, and upon it an ivory handle was fitted.

Then she went to the storeroom attended by serving-women,
far in the back, where there for her lord the treasures were lying,
bronze and gold, and iron wrought through labor in plenty.

There lay the bow with its backward bend, and the quiver for arrows,
arrow-receiving;

and many grief-giving shafts were within it,
gifts that a guest-friend gave him in Lacedaemon upon meeting,
Iphitus son of Eurytus, like to the deathless immortals.

These two had met one another in Messene country,
in the house of warlike Ortilochus;

there Odysseus
came on a matter of debt, which the whole folk owed unto him;

for Messenian men had lifted from Ithaca sheep there,
three hundred, with shepherds besides, in their many-benched vessels.

For their sake over a very long road came godlike Odysseus,
still but a boy;

for his father had sent him, and elders beside him.

Iphitus meanwhile was searching for horses, the mares that were missing,
twelve brood-mares, and beneath them hard-working mule-colts were suckling.

These were the mares that later became for him death and destruction,
when indeed he came to the mighty-hearted son of great Zeus,
to Heracles, man well skilled in the knowledge of splendid achievements,
who killed him, though he was a guest within his own dwelling,
ruthless man;

he respected not gods’ overseeing, nor table,
that which he set before him, but after that slew him as well there,
and himself kept the strong-hoofed horses within his own hall there.

Asking of these, he encountered Odysseus and gave him the bow there,
which in former days great Eurytus bore;

but he left it
to his son in his high-roofed house as he lay there dying.

Then Odysseus gave him a sharp sword and a powerful spear-shaft,
first beginning a guest-friend bond of affection between them;

yet they had never known one another at table, because first
Zeus’ son had killed Iphitus son of Eurytus, godlike,
he who had given the bow.

But noble Odysseus never
took it along when he went to the war on the black ships sailing;

rather it stayed in his hall as a keepsake of his dear guest-friend,
but on his own land always he carried and used it.

But when now that bright queen among women came to the chamber,
and stepped upon the oaken threshold, which once a craftsman,
planing it well with his skill, had straightened true to the line there,
and in it fixed the doorposts, and fastened the shining doors on,
straightway then she quickly unloosed the strap from the handle,
thrust in the key, and she pushed back the bolts of the doors there,
aiming straight;

and the doors gave bellow, like some stalled bull beast
feeding out in a meadow;

so bellowed the beautiful panels,
struck by the key, and before her they flew wide open quickly.

Then she stepped on the lofty floorboards;

and there stood the chests where
fragrant clothing was lying away in the boxes among them.

Reaching up from that place, from a peg she took down the bow there,
with its bright case itself, which lay all around it enclosing.

Then sitting down on the spot, and laying it there on her knees dear,
she wept very shrilly aloud, and drew forth her lord’s bow from it.

But when at last she had had her fill of the tearful lamenting,
then she went toward the hall and the haughty suitors within it,
holding in hand the bow with its backward bend, and the quiver
arrow-receiving;