and many grief-giving shafts were within it.

With her the serving-women bore also a chestful of contest-gear,
where much iron was stored and bronze, the prizes of that lord.

But when she came to the suitors, that bright queen among women,
there she stood by a pillar that held the close-fitted roofing,
drawing the shining veil before her face and her cheeks there;

and a good faithful handmaid stood attending her on either side.

Then at once among all the suitors she spoke out and addressed them:

“Hear me, you overweening suitors, who over this household
feed and drink your fill continually, day after day here,
while its master is gone for so long;

and you could find no other
pretext at all to put forth, no word of excuse whatsoever,
only desire to wed me and make me your own wife hereafter.

Come then, suitors, since now this contest is plainly before you.

For I will set out the great bow of godlike Odysseus.

Whoever most easily strings this bow in the grip of his hands there,
and shoots an arrow clean through the holes of all twelve axes,
him I will follow then, leaving behind me this household,
this my wedded home, so beautiful, rich in the means of existence;

this, I think, I shall yet remember even within dreams only.”
So she spoke, and commanded Eumaeus, the noble swineherd,
to set forth the bow for the suitors, and the gray iron beside it.

Weeping, Eumaeus received them, and laid them carefully down there;

and on the other side the cowherd wept, seeing his master's bow there.

Then Antinous rebuked them, and spoke, and addressed them by name thus:

“Foolish field-hand servants, with thoughts for the day and no farther,
why do you let tears pour down, poor fools, and trouble the woman's
heart in her breast, when even without that her spirit is lying
deep in pain, since she lost her beloved husband forever?

No, sit quiet and feast where you are, or else go outside there
and do your weeping, once you have left the bow here where it lies now,
an ordeal for the suitors, hard to accomplish;

for truly
I do not think this polished bow will be strung up so lightly.

For there is no man among all these men assembled before us
such as Odysseus was;

I myself have seen him plainly,
yes, and remember him well, though then I was only a young child.”
So he spoke;

but his heart in his chest was hoping within him
he would string the cord on the bow and shoot through the iron.

Yet he was destined himself to be first to taste of the arrow
from the hands of noble Odysseus, the man whom he slighted
there as he sat in his halls, while he urged on all his companions.

Then the sacred strength of Telemachus answered among them:

“Father Zeus, son of Cronos, has made me witless indeed now.

My own dear mother tells me, though wise in her mind as she always is,
that she will go with another man, abandoning this household;

and I laugh, and delight in it, with my foolish heart in me.

Come then, suitors, since now this contest is set forth before you,
for such a woman there is not now in the whole Achaean
land, not in holy Pylos, nor in Argos, nor in Mycenae,
nor in Ithaca itself, nor the dark land over against it;

and you yourselves know this.

Why should I praise my mother?

Come then, do not keep drawing this out with evasions and delays now,
nor hold back any longer from stringing the bow.

Let us see it.

I myself also would make trial and test of the bow now:

if I can string it, and send the shaft clean through the iron,
then my honored mother would not leave these halls to my grieving,
going away with another, while I was left here behind her,
I who at last could take up my father's fair contest-prizes.”
So he spoke, and flung from his shoulders his cloak of crimson;