But go to the house and attend to the works that are yours there,
to the loom and the distaff, and bid your handmaids beside you
follow their work.

The bow shall be matter of care for the menfolk,
for all men, but for me above all;

for the power is mine in the household.”
She in amazement turned and went back again to the house there,
for she laid up within her heart her son’s prudent saying.

Then to the upper room she climbed with attendant women,
and there she wept for Odysseus, her own dear husband,
till on her eyelids bright-eyed Athena cast sweet sleep there.

Then the noble swineherd took up and carried the curved bow;

and all the suitors at once raised a clamor through the hall there.

Thus would a man among those overbearing young men be saying:

“Where are you taking the curved bow, miserable swineherd,
vagabond?

Soon out among your swine the swift dogs will devour you,
lone and apart from men, the dogs that you yourself reared,
if Apollo should grant us his grace, and the other immortals.”
So they spoke, and he set it down where he stood while he carried it,
frightened, because many men were shouting together in hall there.

But from the other side Telemachus called out and threatened:

“Old friend, carry the bow on forward.

You will not obey all men gladly.

Otherwise, though younger than you, I will drive you to the fields there,
hurling stones at you, since in strength I am stronger than you are.

If only against all these men, as many as are in the house here,
all the suitors, I were the stronger in hands and in vigor,
then I would quickly send some one of them wretchedly homeward,
out of our house, since it is evil they scheme and devise here.”
So he spoke, and all the suitors laughed out sweetly upon him,
and indeed let go of their bitter anger against Telemachus.

Then through the hall the swineherd, carrying the bow, came onward
and stood by Odysseus, master of craft, and put it into his hands there.

Then he called to the nurse and spoke to Eurycleia:

“Telemachus bids you, prudent Eurycleia, hear him:

bar the doors of the hall, close-fitted firmly together.

If any woman should hear within the house some groaning
or the crash of men inside our walls, let her not go outward
peering from doors, but stay there quietly beside her labor.”
So he spoke, and for her the word was wingless and stayed there;

and she barred the doors of the halls of the well-built dwelling.

Silently out of the house Philoetius sprang through the doorway,
and after that he barred the gates of the well-fenced courtyard.

Under the porch there lay a cable of seafaring vessel,
twisted of byblus, with which he bound fast the gates, then returned there,
and going back sat down on the stool from which he had risen,
watching Odysseus.

And he already was handling the bow there,
turning it over and over, and testing it this way and that way,
lest worms might have eaten the horn in the absence of its master.

Thus a man would say, glancing over toward one who was near him:

“Surely a connoisseur and an expert thief of bows, this fellow;

likely such things as these are lying somewhere at home for him,
or he is eager to make one, so he turns it in his hands there,
this way and that, this vagrant well-schooled in suffering and evil.”
Then another would say of the young men swollen with arrogance:

“May he be met with as much of profit and blessing hereafter
as ever this man will succeed in stringing that weapon.”
So said the suitors;