No other stranger at all and no beggar
gets to hear the speeches and words that belong among us here.

Honey-sweet wine is what harms you, wine that also harms other men,
any man who takes it greedily down and does not drink in due measure.

Wine was what drove to madness the Centaur, the glorious Eurytion,
in the hall of Peirithous, that great-hearted lord among men there,
when he came to the Lapiths;

and after the wine had deranged him,
in his frenzy he wrought evil deeds through the house of Peirithous.

Then grief took hold of the heroes, and up from their seats they sprang swiftly,
dragged him out through the porch to the open, and pitiless bronze sheared
both of his ears and his nostrils away;

and he, in his spirit
crazed, went onward bearing his doom in his senseless heart with him.

From that there arose strife and feud between Centaurs and mortals;

but he, being wine-weighed down, found evil first for himself there.

So also for you I foretell a great ruin, if once you should string
this bow;

for you will encounter no kindness from anyone
here in our land, but at once in a black ship we shall send you
to King Echetus, the bane of all mortals living upon earth.

And from him you will not escape.

So drink in quiet, and do not
strive in contention with men who are younger and stronger than you are.”
Then prudent Penelope answered him, watchful in spirit:

“Antinous, it is neither good nor just to dishonor
guests of Telemachus, whoever should come to the doors of this household.

Do you suppose that if this stranger should string great Odysseus’ bow here,
trusting his hands and the strength that belongs to his body,
he will lead me homeward with him and make me his own wife there?

Not even he himself, I think, hopes this within his own bosom.

Let not one of you then sit grieving in spirit about this hereafter,
feasting here in this hall, since this would not be fitting at all.”
Then Eurymachus, Polybus’ son, addressed her in answer:

“Daughter of Icarius, prudent Penelope, hear us:

it is not this that we think, that he will carry you off;

that is not fitting.

No, but we shrink from the talk of men and of women,
lest at some time one baser Achaean should say it:

“Men far inferior woo the wife of a blameless man here,
yet they cannot string his bow, well-polished and shapely;

but some other beggared man, a wanderer, came among them,
easily bent the bow and shot straight through all the iron.”
Thus they will speak, and this would become our reproach and dishonor.”
Then in turn wise-hearted Penelope answered him:

“Eurymachus, there is no way for men to have fair glory
through all the land, when they consume and dishonor the household
of a man who is better than they are.

Why make this a disgrace, then?

This stranger here is indeed a tall man and strongly fashioned,
and he declares that he is a son of a noble father.

Come then, give him the polished bow, so that we may behold him.

For thus I will speak, and this thing also shall be accomplished:

if he shall string it, and Apollo grant him the glory,
I will clothe him in cloak and in tunic, garments of beauty,
and I will give him a sharp javelin, warder from dogs and from men too,
and a two-edged sword;

I will give him sandals beneath him,
and send him wherever his heart and spirit command him.”
Then clear-souled Telemachus answered her face to face, saying:

“Mother of mine, of the Achaeans there is not any better
than I am to give this bow, if I choose, or refuse it,
neither of all who hold sway throughout rugged Ithaca,
nor of those in the islands toward horse-pasturing Elis.

Not one of these will constrain me against my will, if I wish it,
even to give to the stranger this bow, to bear it away with him always.