But you, noble Eumaeus, must carry the bow through the hall there
and place it into my hands, and tell the women this also:

let them shut fast the doors of the hall with their closely fitted joinings;

and if any woman should hear a groaning or racket of menfolk
here within our walls, let her not come hurrying out through the doorway,
but stay where she is in silence and keep to the work that is by her.

And to you, noble Philoetius, I entrust the doors of the courtyard;

bolt them fast with the key, and quickly cast on the door-bar.”
So having spoken, he entered the well-inhabited household,
then he went and sat on the chair from which he had arisen;

and into the hall came in as well those two thralls of Odysseus.

Now Eurymachus already was turning the bow in his fingers,
warming it here and there in the blaze and the glow of the firelight;

yet not even so could he string it, and loudly his proud heart groaned there.

Then in vexation he spoke, and addressed them and uttered this saying:

“Oh for shame, what grief has come over me, for myself and for all men.

It is not so much for the marriage that I am lamenting,
though I am grieved;

for there are many Achaean women besides her,
some in seagirt Ithaca here, and some in the other cities.

No, but if we are so far lacking the strength and the prowess
of godlike Odysseus that we cannot stretch and string
this bow, that will be a disgrace for men yet to come to hear of.”
Then in turn Antinous answered him, son of Eupeithes:

“Eurymachus, it will not be so;

and you know it yourself well.

Now through the land there is held the feast of the god, and it is holy.

Who then would be bending a bow?

No, let it rest there in silence.

Sit down;

and the axes at least we may leave there, every one standing.

For I do not think that anyone ever will carry them off now,
coming into the hall of Odysseus, son of Laertes.

But come, let the wine-pourer first make beginning among the cups,
so that after libation we may lay down the curved bow.

Then at dawn bid Melanthius, the goatherd who tends all the she-goats,
drive in the goats that are finest by far of all in his keeping,
so that, laying the thigh-pieces on for Apollo the famed archer,
we may make trial of the bow and accomplish the contest.”
So spoke Antinous, and his speech gave pleasure to all of them.

Then the heralds poured water over their hands for the washing,
and the young men filled up the mixing-bowls, crowning them with the drink,
and passed it around to them all, beginning the service with goblets.

But when they had poured and had drunk as much as the heart was desiring,
then among them resourceful Odysseus spoke with deep cunning:

“Hear me, you suitors who court our queen of the great renown here,
so that I may say what the spirit inside of my breast is commanding.

Most of all I entreat Eurymachus now, and godlike Antinous,
since indeed he also has spoken this word in due measure:

for the present let be the bow, and entrust all the matter to heaven;

and at dawn some god will grant the victory to whom he wishes.

But come, give me the well-polished bow, that here among all of you
I may make trial of my hands and my strength, whether still there abides in me
force such as once there was in my supple and bendable members,
or whether wandering and lack of all care have ruined it wholly.”
So he spoke, and they all were indignant beyond any measure,
fearing lest he might truly string the well-polished bow there.

Then Antinous rebuked him, and addressed him and uttered this saying:

“You unhappy stranger, there are not in you even the slightest wits.

Is it not enough that in quiet among us proud men you are feasting,
nor are deprived of the meal, while you listen to all of our speeches
and to our discourse?