“Come now, Melantheus, kindle a fire in the hall for us,
set a great seat beside it, and spread a fleece on top of it,
and from the stores bring out a great round of lard from within there,
so the young men may warm it and smear it well with the grease then,
and make trial of the bow and bring the contest to ending.”
So he spoke, and at once Melanthius kindled the tireless fire there,
and carrying a great seat he set it down and laid fleece on it,
and from the stores he brought a great round of lard from within there.

With this the young men warmed it and made their trial;

yet none could
string it at all, but they were far lacking in bodily vigor.

Still Antinous held back, and Eurymachus godlike beside him,
leaders of all the suitors, the finest of all in their manhood.

Then out from the house those two went forth together, both of them,
cowherd and swineherd, servants of noble Odysseus;

and after these from the house came out godlike Odysseus himself.

But when they had come outside of the doors and outside the courtyard,
then he addressed them aloud and spoke with gentle words to them:

“Cowherd, and you as well, swineherd, what word shall I speak to you?

Shall I conceal it myself?

Yet my heart bids me tell it.

What sort of men would you be to defend Odysseus
if he should suddenly come here somehow, and a god should conduct him?

Would you defend the suitors, or rather stand by Odysseus?

Speak, as your own heart within you and spirit command you.”
Then the master and herdsman of cattle answered and said to him:

“Father Zeus, if only you would fulfill this longing for me,
if that man might come, and some god might lead him here to us:

then you would know what my strength is, and how my hands follow.”
And in the same way Eumaeus prayed to all of the gods there
that resourceful Odysseus might come back home to this house.

But when he had fully discerned the true mind in both of them,
then once again he answered and spoke with words to them:

“Here in the house I myself am that man;

after many afflictions
I have returned in the twentieth year to my fatherland country.

I know that I come as the longed-for one to you two only
out of the slaves;

of the rest I have never heard any among them
praying that I might return once more and come back to my household.

Yet to you two, exactly as all this will be, I will tell it.

If under my hand some god should subdue the splendid suitors,
I will provide for you both with wives and with goods and possessions,
and homes built close by mine;

and afterward both of you shall be
comrades to me and brothers as well to Telemachus.

Come then, and let me show you another most evident token,
so that within your hearts you may know me and trust and believe me:

this scar, which once a boar struck into me with his white tusk
when I had gone to Parnassus with sons of Autolycus.”
So he spoke, and he drew back the rags from the great scar before them.

And when the two had beheld it and clearly observed every detail,
then around wise Odysseus they wept and threw both arms about him,
and they kept kissing his head and his shoulders in loving welcome;

and in the same way Odysseus kissed their heads and their hands there.

And now the light of the sun would have set on their lamentation,
had not Odysseus himself checked them and spoken and said this:

“Stop now from weeping and wailing, lest someone should see you and notice,
coming out from the hall, and then go tell those inside of it.

But go back in to the suitors one after another, not all together.

I will go first, and after me you;

and let this be our token:

all the others, all these splendid and lordly suitors here,
will not permit that the bow and the quiver be handed to me.