Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him:
"Eurymachus, and all you other haughty suitors:
I plead with you no further; I say no more of this.
The gods know it now, and all the Achaeans.
But come, give me a fast ship and twenty companions
to carry me on a journey there and back again.
For I am going to Sparta and to sandy Pylos
to ask after the homecoming of my long-gone father,
in hope some mortal man will tell me, or I may hear the Rumor
that comes from Zeus, which most of all carries word among men.
If I hear my father is alive and homeward bound,
then, ground down as I am, I could hold out one more year;
but if I hear that he is dead, that he is no more,
then I will come back to my own dear fatherland
and heap his burial mound, and over it pay the death-rites,
very many, as is fitting, and give my mother to a husband."

So he spoke, and sat down. And there rose among them
Mentor, the companion of blameless Odysseus,
to whom, going aboard his ships, he had entrusted his whole house —
that all should obey the old man, and he keep everything safe.
With good will toward them he spoke to the assembly:

"Hear me now, men of Ithaca, hear what I say.
Let no sceptered king ever again be willingly
kind and gentle, or know the right way in his heart;
let him rather be harsh always, and act outrage —
since no one remembers godlike Odysseus
among the people he ruled, and he was gentle as a father.
It is not the lordly suitors I begrudge, not really,
for their deeds of violence woven in an evil-scheming mind:
they lay their own heads on the wager when they devour
by violence the house of Odysseus, saying he will come home no more.
It is the rest of the people I am angry at — the way you all
sit there dumb, and never fasten on them with words
and stop them: the suitors few, and you so many."

Then Leocritus, Evenor's son, answered him:
"Mentor, wrecker, brain gone wandering — what a thing you have said,
urging them to stop us. It is heavy work
to fight with men over a feast — men who outnumber you at that.
Why, if Ithacan Odysseus himself came in on us
and found the lordly suitors feasting in his house
and set his heart on driving them out of the hall,
his wife would have no joy of his coming, however
she has ached for him: right there he would meet an ugly death,
if he fought men who outnumbered him. What you have said misses the mark.
Come now — people, scatter, each man to his own work.
As for this one, Mentor and Halitherses can speed his journey,
being companions of his father's house from the beginning.
Though I think he will sit here a long while yet, gathering his news
in Ithaca; that voyage he will never make."

So he spoke, and dissolved the assembly on the instant.
They scattered, each man to his own house,
and the suitors went off to the house of godlike Odysseus.

But Telemachus walked apart, to the sand-beach of the sea,
washed his hands in the gray salt water, and prayed to Athena:
"Hear me, you who came yesterday, a god, into our house,
and bade me go by ship over the misted sea
to ask after the homecoming of my long-gone father.
All of it the Achaeans grind to a halt —
the suitors most of all, in their evil overbearing pride."