So he prayed, and Athena came to him, close at hand,
in the likeness of Mentor, both his body and his voice,
and lifting her voice she spoke winged words to him:
"Telemachus, you will be no coward from this day, and no fool,
if any of your father's brave force is instilled in you —
such a man he was for making good both deed and word.
Then this journey of yours will be no idle errand, and not unaccomplished.
But if you are not his son, his and Penelope's,
then I have no hope you will accomplish what you set your heart on.
Few sons, in truth, turn out the equals of their fathers:
the most are worse; a few are better men than their fathers.
But since you will be no coward from this day, and no fool,
and the cunning of Odysseus has not wholly failed in you,
there is every hope you will accomplish this work.
So now let the suitors' plotting and scheming go —
mindless men, with neither sense nor justice in them:
they know nothing of the death and the black doom
that stands close by them, to destroy them all in a day.
The journey you have set your heart on will not be long delayed —
such a companion am I, out of your father's house:
I will fit out a fast ship for you, and come along myself.
You go back to the house now, and move among the suitors;
make ready provisions, and stow them all in vessels —
wine in two-handled jars, and barley meal, the marrow of men,
in tight-sewn skins. And I, through the town,
will gather willing companions, and quickly. There are ships
in plenty in sea-circled Ithaca, new ships and old:
I will look them over for you and choose the best,
and we will rig her fast and launch her on the wide sea."

So spoke Athena, daughter of Zeus. And no longer then
did Telemachus linger, once he had heard the voice of the god.
He went on his way to the house, his heart heavy within him,
and found the lordly suitors there in the halls,
skinning goats and singeing fat hogs in the courtyard.
Antinous came laughing straight at Telemachus,
clamped a hand on his, and spoke a word, and named him:
"Telemachus, high talker, temper past restraining — let no other
evil trouble your breast, no other deed or word.
Just eat with me, and drink, the way it used to be.
The Achaeans will see to all those things of yours —
a ship and picked oarsmen — so you may come the sooner
to holy Pylos, after news of your proud father."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him:
"Antinous, there is no way, among you in your insolence,
to eat my supper quietly and take my ease in peace.
Is it not enough that all this while, suitors, you carved up
my goods, so many and so fine, while I was still a child?
Now — when I am grown, and hear the talk of other men
and understand it, and the spirit swells inside me —
I will try to hurl an evil doom upon you,
whether I go to Pylos or stay here in this land.
But go I will, and the journey I speak of will be no idle errand —
a passenger on another's ship, since master of ship or oarsmen
I am not to be. That, no doubt, seemed the more profitable to you."

He spoke, and wrenched his hand from Antinous' hand,
easily. And through the house the suitors busied themselves with the feast,
and they mocked him and needled him with words.
And thus would one of the arrogant young men say:
"No question — Telemachus is planning our murder!
He will bring back avengers from sandy Pylos,
or else from Sparta, since he is so terribly set on it.
Or maybe he means to go to Ephyra, that rich plowland,
to fetch home poisons that eat the life away,
and drop them in the wine-bowl, and destroy us all."