Then the goddess thought of one thing more, gray-eyed Athena.
She went on her way to the house of godlike Odysseus,
and there she poured sweet sleep over the suitors,
addled them as they drank, and knocked the cups from their hands.
They stumbled off to sleep through the town, and sat no longer,
for sleep was falling on their eyelids.
But to Telemachus gray-eyed Athena spoke,
calling him out in front of the well-settled halls,
in the likeness of Mentor, both his body and his voice:
"Telemachus, your strong-greaved companions are already
sitting at the oars, waiting on your word to start.
Come, let us go; let us not hold the journey long."

So speaking, Pallas Athena led the way
swiftly, and he followed in the footsteps of the god.
And when they had come down to the ship and the sea,
they found the long-haired companions on the beach,
and the sacred strength of Telemachus spoke among them:
"Come, friends, let us fetch the provisions: everything now
stands gathered in the hall. My mother has heard nothing,
nor the slave-women either; one alone was told."

So speaking he led the way, and they went with him.
They carried everything down and stowed it in the well-benched ship
as the dear son of Odysseus commanded.
Then Telemachus went aboard, Athena going before him;
she sat down in the stern of the ship, and close beside her
sat Telemachus. And the men cast off the stern-lines
and came aboard themselves and took their places at the oarlocks.
And gray-eyed Athena sent them a following wind,
a fresh West Wind, singing over the wine-dark sea.
Telemachus shouted to his companions, commanding them
to lay hands on the rigging, and they heard his urging:
they raised the pine mast and stepped it inside the hollow mast-box,
set it up and made it fast with the forestays,
and hauled up the white sails by the well-twisted ox-hide ropes.
The wind bellied out the middle of the sail, and the wave
hissed dark and loud around the keel as the ship went on,
and she ran down the waves, making her way.
Then, when they had lashed the tackle down the fast black ship,
they set up mixing-bowls crowned brim-full with wine
and poured to the deathless gods who are forever,
and beyond all others to the gray-eyed daughter of Zeus.
All night long, and into the dawn, the ship cut her way.

---