"Old sir, that man is not far off — you shall see for yourself —
who called the people: it is I; grief comes down hardest on me.
I have heard no news of the army coming home
which I might tell you plainly, having learned of it first,
nor is there other public matter I would open and argue:
it is my own need, the evils fallen on my house —
twofold. I have lost my noble father, who once was king
among you here, and he was gentle as a father;
and now something far greater, which will soon tear apart
my whole house utterly and destroy my living altogether.
Suitors have set upon my mother — against her will —
the own dear sons of the men who here are noblest,
and they shrink from going to the house of her father
Icarius, so that he might set his daughter's bride-terms himself
and give her to whom he will, whoever comes and pleases her.
Instead they haunt our house day after day,
slaughtering our oxen and our sheep and our fat goats,
feasting and drinking the fire-bright wine
with no reckoning. And the most of it is wasted. For there is no man here
such as Odysseus was, to beat ruin away from the house.
We are not the men to beat it back — believe me, ever after
we would be pitiable men, and unschooled in fighting.
Beat it back I would, if only the strength were in me!
For what is done here is past all bearing; past all decency
my house is ruined. Feel the outrage yourselves;
feel shame before the peoples who are our neighbors,
those who dwell around us; and dread the wrath of the gods,
lest in fury at evil deeds they turn them back on your heads.
I beg you — by Olympian Zeus, and by Themis,
who dissolves the assemblies of men and seats them —
hold off, friends! Leave me alone to waste away
in my bitter grief. Unless perhaps my father, good Odysseus,
in malice did the strong-greaved Achaeans harm,
and in requital you do me harm in malice,
egging these men on. Better for me by far
if it were you yourselves devouring my treasures and my herds:
were you the ones eating, there might one day be repayment,
for then we would go up and down the town pressing our claim,
demanding our goods back, until all was given over.
Instead you heap on my heart pains past any remedy."

So he spoke in anger, and dashed the scepter to the ground,
bursting into tears. And pity took hold of all the people.
Then all the rest stayed silent, and no one dared
to answer Telemachus with hard words;
Antinous alone made him this answer: