So spoke Telemachus. And Zeus of the wide voice sent him two eagles,
flying from on high, from a mountain peak.
For a while the two flew on with the breath of the wind,
close by one another, wings at full stretch;
but when they came dead over the many-voiced assembly,
they wheeled there, beating their wings thick and fast,
and glared down on all their heads, and death was in their gaze;
then they ripped with their talons at each other's cheeks and throats
and shot away rightward, over the houses and the town.
The men were astonished at the birds their eyes had seen,
and turned over in their hearts what this would bring to pass.

And among them spoke the old hero Halitherses,
Mastor's son, who surpassed all men of his day
in reading birds and speaking what fate intends.
With good will toward them he spoke to the assembly:

"Hear me now, men of Ithaca, hear what I say —
though to the suitors above all I declare it:
on them a great wave of ruin is rolling. For Odysseus
will not be long parted from his people; already, somewhere
near, he is planting death and slaughter for these men,
every one; and evil will come on many of the rest of us
who live in clear-skied Ithaca. Long before that,
let us think how to stop them — or let them stop
themselves: the sooner the better, for their own sake.
I prophesy as no novice; I know my art.
And for that man too I say it is all coming home,
all I told him when the Argives went up into Ilium
and Odysseus of the many designs went with them.
I said that after long suffering, his companions all lost,
unknown to everyone, in the twentieth year
he would come home. And now it is all being accomplished."

Then Eurymachus, Polybus' son, answered him:
"Old man, off with you — go home and prophesy to your children,
lest some evil overtake them in days to come.
In this I am a far better prophet than you.
Plenty of birds go back and forth beneath the rays of the sun,
and not all of them are fate. As for Odysseus:
he is dead, far away — and how I wish that you had perished with him.
You would not then be spouting all this prophecy,
or whetting the anger of Telemachus —
angling for some gift for your household, should he offer one.
But I will tell you this, and it will be accomplished:
if you, who know so many things grown old with you,
talk a younger man around with words and stir him to fury,
for the man himself, first, it will go the harder,
and in any case he will accomplish nothing for all these words;
and on you, old man, we will lay a fine that in the paying
will gall your heart: and the pain of it will be hard.
And to Telemachus, before you all, my own advice is this:
let him command his mother to go back to her father's house.
There they will make the marriage and set out the bride-gifts,
very many, all that should follow a beloved child.
Not before, I think, will the sons of the Achaeans quit
their courting — a grinding courtship. We fear no one, not at all;
no, not Telemachus, for all his stream of words;
nor do we care a whit for prophecy, old man, that you
mouth to no accomplishment — it only makes you the more hated.
His goods will be devoured as badly as ever, and never made good,
so long as she puts the Achaeans off about
her marriage. And we, waiting all our days,
rival one another for her excellence, and do not go after
other women, fit brides for any of us."