and four springs in a row ran with bright water,
close by one another, turned each its own way;

and around them soft meadows of violet and wild celery
were blooming.

There even a deathless one, arriving,
would gaze in wonder at the sight and be gladdened at heart.

There the guide, the slayer of Argus, stood gazing.

And when his heart had wondered at it all,
he went straight into the wide cave.

Nor did Calypso,
shining among goddesses, fail to know him face to face:

for the deathless gods are not unknown to one another,
not even one whose dwelling lies far off.

But great-hearted Odysseus he did not find within:

he sat weeping on the shore, where he always sat,
shredding his heart with tears and groans and pains,
and over the barren sea he would gaze, letting the tears run.

And Calypso, shining among goddesses, questioned Hermes,
seating him on a chair all bright and gleaming:

"Why have you come to me, Hermes of the golden rod,
honored guest and dear?

You have not been used to come before.

Say what is in your mind:

my heart bids me do it
if I can do it — if it is a thing that can be done.

But follow me in first, and let me set out guest-fare."
So speaking the goddess drew up a table for him,
heaping it with ambrosia, and mixed the red nectar;

and the guide, the slayer of Argus, drank and ate.

And when he had supped, and steadied his heart with food,
then he spoke out in answer to her question:

"You ask me why I come — goddess to god;

and I will tell you
the whole of it truly, since you bid me.

Zeus ordered me here.

I did not want to come:

who would choose to cross so vast a stretch of salt water,
past speaking?

And no city of mortals near, to offer
the gods their victims and their choice hecatombs.

But there is no way for another god to slip past
or thwart the mind of Zeus who bears the aegis.

He says there is a man with you — the most miserable of all
the men who fought nine years around the city of Priam
and in the tenth year sacked it, and turned for home.

But on the way home they sinned against Athena,
and she roused an evil wind against them, and long seas.

There all the rest of his brave companions perished,
but wind and wave carried him here.

That man Zeus bids you send on his way — and quickly:

it is not his portion to die here, far from his own people;

it is still his portion to see his own people and come
to his high-roofed house and his own fatherland."
So he spoke;

and Calypso, shining among goddesses, shivered,
and lifting her voice she spoke winged words to him:

"You are merciless, you gods — jealous beyond all beings —
who begrudge goddesses their sleeping with men
openly, if one takes a man as her own dear husband.

So when Dawn of the rose-red fingers took Orion,
you gods who live at ease begrudged it to her,
until in Ortygia chaste Artemis of the golden throne
came at him with her gentle arrows and killed him.

So when Demeter of the lovely braids gave way to her heart
and lay with Iasion in love in the bed
of a thrice-plowed fallow field — Zeus was not long
in hearing, and he killed him with a hurl of the white lightning.

And so now me, you gods:

you begrudge me a mortal man beside me.

I saved him — riding astride his keel, alone,
after Zeus with a hurl of the white lightning had shattered
his fast ship apart in the middle of the wine-dark sea.

There all the rest of his brave companions perished,
but wind and wave carried him here.

And I loved him, and I fed him, and I promised
to make him deathless and unaging all his days.

But since there is no way for another god to slip past
or thwart the mind of Zeus who bears the aegis —
let him go, if that one urges it and commands,
out over the barren sea.

Only I will not convey him: