But Athena, daughter of Zeus, thought of other things.

She bound up the courses of all the other winds
and commanded every one to rest and fall asleep,
and roused the quick North Wind, and broke the waves before him,
so that Zeus-born Odysseus might come among the oar-loving
Phaeacians, having slipped past death and the dooms.

Two nights then and two days on the close-packed swell
he drifted, and many times his heart looked destruction in the face.

But when Dawn of the lovely braids brought the third day round,
then at last the wind fell, and a windless calm
came on;

and he saw the land close by,
casting a sharp glance forward, lifted on a great wave.

As when a father's life shows dear and welcome to his children —
a father who lies in sickness suffering strong pains,
long wasting away, some hateful power upon him,
and then, dear and welcome, the gods set him free of his evil —
so welcome to Odysseus showed the land and the trees,
and he swam hard, straining to set foot on solid earth.

But when he was as far offshore as a man's shout carries,
he heard the boom of sea against the rock-teeth:

the great swell thundered on the dry land's edge,
belching terribly, and everything was shrouded in salt spray.

For there were no harbors there to hold ships, no roadsteads —
only jutting headlands, rock-teeth, and cliff-faces.

And then Odysseus' knees went loose, and his heart,
and deeply stirred he spoke to his own great heart:

"Ah me — now that Zeus has given me sight of land
unhoped for, and I have won across this gulf at last,
no way out of the gray salt water shows anywhere:

sharp crags offshore, and all around them the wave
roaring and churning, and the rock running up sheer,
and the sea deep close in — nowhere to stand
on both my feet and escape the evil.

If I try to climb out, the great wave may snatch me
and hurl me on the standing stone, and my try go for nothing.

But if I swim along still farther, hoping to find
shelving beaches somewhere, and harbors of the sea,
I fear the storm-squall snatches me up again
and carries me, groaning heavily, over the fish-filled sea —
or some power looses a monster on me out of the brine,
one of the swarm that famous Amphitrite pastures:

for I know how the famous shaker of earth is at odds with me."
While he was turning this over in his mind and in his heart,
a great wave carried him onto the jagged shore.

There his skin would have been stripped, his bones smashed in,
had not the goddess, gray-eyed Athena, put a thought in him:

lunging in, he seized the rock with both hands
and clung there groaning while the great wave went past.

That one he escaped so;

but its backwash leapt on him again
and struck him and threw him far out to sea.

As when an octopus is dragged out of its den
and thick pebbles cling in the cups of its arms,
so from his bold hands the skin was stripped away
against the rocks;

and the great wave closed over him.

There, before his time, wretched Odysseus would have perished,
had not gray-eyed Athena given him clear sense.

Coming up out of the surf where it belches at the land,
he swam along outside it, looking to the shore in hope of finding
shelving beaches somewhere, and harbors of the sea.

But when, swimming, he came to the mouth of a fair-flowing river,
there at last the ground seemed best to him,
clear of stones, and there was shelter from the wind.

He felt the current flowing and prayed in his heart:

"Hear me, lord, whoever you are.

I come to you — the much-prayed-to —
a fugitive out of the sea, from the threats of Poseidon.

Even to the deathless gods that man is sacred
who comes as a wanderer, as I come now
to your stream and to your knees, after much labor.

Pity me, lord:

I declare myself your suppliant."
So he spoke;