But the daughter of Cadmus saw him — Ino of the beautiful ankles,
the White Goddess, who once was mortal, with a mortal voice,
and now in the salt depths has her share of honor from the gods.
She pitied Odysseus, driven wandering, worn with pains,
and in the likeness of a shearwater she rose on the wing from the water,
and perched on the close-bound raft, and said:
"Luckless man, why is Poseidon the earth-shaker
so terribly at odds with you, that he plants all these evils for you?
Yet he shall not destroy you, for all his fury.
Only do exactly this — you do not seem to me short of sense.
Strip off these clothes, and leave the raft for the winds
to carry; strike out swimming with your hands for a homecoming
on the Phaeacians' land, where it is your portion to escape.
Here — spread this veil under your chest.
It is immortal: no fear then of suffering or death.
But the moment your hands take hold of dry land,
untie it again and throw it into the wine-dark sea,
far out from land, and turn your own face away."
So speaking the goddess gave him the veil,
and she herself sank back into the surging sea
in the likeness of a shearwater, and the black wave closed over her.
But much-enduring noble Odysseus pondered,
and deeply stirred he spoke to his own great heart:
"Ah me — let this not be some new snare of the immortals
woven against me, when she bids me abandon my raft.
No: I will not obey her yet. Far off with my own eyes
I saw the land where she said my refuge is.
I will do this instead — it seems to me the best:
as long as the timbers hold in their fastenings,
so long I stay aboard and endure my sufferings where I am;
but the moment the wave shakes the raft to pieces,
I swim. There is no better plan to see."

While he was turning this over in his mind and in his heart,
Poseidon the earth-shaker heaved up a great wave,
terrible and grim, arching over him, and drove it down.
And as a violent wind tosses a heap of dry chaff
and scatters the wisps this way and that way,
so it scattered the raft's long timbers. But Odysseus
got astride one beam, like a man riding a racehorse,
and stripped off the clothes that shining Calypso gave,
and spread the veil at once beneath his chest,
and plunged headfirst in the sea, arms spread wide,
hungry to swim. And the strong earth-shaker saw him,
and shaking his head he spoke to his own heart:
"So — now suffer your many evils and drift the sea,
until you come among a people nurtured of Zeus.
But even so I do not think you will make light of your trouble."
So speaking he lashed his horses of the beautiful manes
and came to Aegae, where his famous house is.