And Dawn rose from her bed beside lordly Tithonus
to carry light to the immortals and to mortals;

and the gods were sitting down in council, among them
Zeus who thunders on high, whose power is greatest.

And Athena was telling over the many cares of Odysseus,
remembering:

it galled her that he was still in the nymph's house:

"Father Zeus, and you other blessed gods who are forever:

let no sceptered king ever again be willingly
kind and gentle, or know the right way in his heart;

let him rather be harsh always, and act outrage —
since no one remembers godlike Odysseus
among the people he ruled, and he was gentle as a father.

No — he lies on an island suffering strong pains
in the halls of the nymph Calypso, who holds him there
by force;

and he cannot come to his own fatherland,
for he has no ships at hand, no oars, no companions
to carry him over the broad back of the sea.

And now, besides, men are bent on killing his beloved son
on his way home:

he went for news of his father
to holy Pylos and to shining Lacedaemon."
Then Zeus who gathers the clouds answered her:

"My child, what a word has slipped the fence of your teeth!

Was it not you who framed this plan yourself —
that Odysseus should come home and take vengeance on those men?

As for Telemachus:

guide him with your skill — you have the power —
so that he reaches his own fatherland untouched,
and the suitors come back in their ship with nothing done."
He spoke, and turned to Hermes, his dear son:

"Hermes — you are our messenger in all things else:

tell the nymph of the lovely braids our fixed decree:

the homecoming of enduring-hearted Odysseus — that he shall return
with no escort of gods and none of mortal men:

on a raft bound plank to plank, and suffering pains,
on the twentieth day he shall reach rich-soiled Scheria,
the land of the Phaeacians, who are born close kin to the gods.

They will honor him with all their hearts, like a god,
and send him in a ship to his own dear fatherland,
giving him bronze and gold and clothing in plenty,
more than Odysseus would ever have carried out of Troy
had he come home untouched with his fair share of the spoils.

For so it is his portion:

to see his own people and come
to his high-roofed house and his own fatherland."
So he spoke, and the guide, the slayer of Argus, did not disobey.

At once he bound beneath his feet the beautiful sandals,
ambrosial, golden, that carry him over the water
and over the boundless earth with the breath of the wind;

and he took up the rod with which he charms men's eyes
to sleep, whose eyes he wills, and wakes others from their slumber.

With this in his hands the strong slayer of Argus flew.

He stepped down on Pieria, then dropped from the high air to the sea
and skimmed along the waves like a shearwater,
the bird that down the terrible troughs of the barren sea
hunts fish, and wets its beating wings in the brine:

like that bird Hermes rode the crowding waves.

But when he reached the island, far away,
he stepped from the violet sea onto dry land
and went on till he came to the great cave where the nymph
of the lovely braids was living;

he found her within.

A great fire was burning on the hearth, and the smell
of split cedar and citron-wood burning carried far,
all over the island.

Inside, she was singing in a beautiful voice,
moving to and fro at the loom, weaving with a golden shuttle.

And around the cave a wood grew tall and flourishing:

alder and black poplar and sweet-smelling cypress,
where long-winged birds made their roosts,
little owls and hawks and long-tongued crows
of the sea, whose business is the waters.

And there, trained over the hollow of the cave, spread
a garden vine in its prime, heavy with clusters;