I have no ships at hand, no oars, no companions
to carry him over the broad back of the sea.

But with a willing heart I will counsel him, and hide nothing,
so that he may reach his own fatherland untouched."
Then the guide, the slayer of Argus, answered her:

"Send him so, then — and beware the wrath of Zeus:

let him not turn against you afterward and bear hard on you."
So speaking, the strong slayer of Argus went away.

And the queenly nymph went to great-hearted Odysseus,
now that she had heard the message of Zeus.

She found him sitting on the shore.

His eyes were never
dry of tears;

his sweet life was draining away
in mourning for his homecoming — the nymph no longer pleased him.

True, at night he would sleep beside her — he had to —
in the hollow caves, unwilling man by willing goddess;

but all his days he sat out on the rocks and the beaches,
shredding his heart with tears and groans and pains,
and over the barren sea he would gaze, letting the tears run.

Standing near him, she spoke, shining among goddesses:

"Luckless man, do not sit grieving here any longer;

do not let
your life waste away.

I am ready now — wholly — to send you off.

Come:

cut long timbers, and join with bronze
a wide raft;

and fix an upper half-deck to it,
raised high, to carry you over the misted sea.

And I will put in bread and water and red wine
to your heart's content, to keep hunger from you,
and I will clothe you, and send a fair wind behind you,
so that you may reach your own fatherland untouched —
if the gods are willing, who hold wide heaven,
who are stronger than I to purpose and accomplish."
So she spoke;

and much-enduring noble Odysseus shuddered,
and lifting his voice he spoke winged words to her:

"Something else you are plotting here, goddess — not my sending —
you who bid me cross the great gulf of the sea on a raft,
that terror, that misery:

not even the trim fast-running
ships cross it, for all their joy in the wind of Zeus.

I will not set foot on any raft against your will —
not unless you bring yourself, goddess, to swear me the great oath
that you are not planning some new evil against me."
So he spoke;

and Calypso, shining among goddesses, smiled,
and stroked him with her hand, and spoke a word, and named him:

"You are a rogue indeed — no lightweight in cunning —
to have thought of a speech like that to say to me.

Now let Earth be witness, and the wide Heaven above,
and the down-dripping water of Styx — the greatest oath
and the most terrible the blessed gods can swear —
that I am not planning some new evil against you.

No:

I am thinking and advising exactly what I would
devise for my own self, if such need came on me.

My mind is honest through and through, and the heart
in my breast is not made of iron.

It knows pity."