but he — like a man wholly wretched, out of luck —
refused to sleep on a bedstead under blankets:

on an undressed oxhide and the fleeces of sheep
he slept in the fore-hall.

We laid a mantle over him ourselves."
So she spoke;

and Telemachus went out through the hall,
spear in hand;

two swift dogs followed with him,
and he went to the assembly-place, to the strong-greaved Achaeans.

And she called out to the slave-women, that woman shining among women —
Eurycleia, daughter of Ops, Peisenor's son:

"Come — to work!

Some of you sweep the house, and briskly,
and sprinkle it, and lay the crimson coverings
on the well-made chairs;

others take sponges
and wipe down all the tables, and rinse the mixing-bowls
and the wrought double-handled cups;

and the rest of you away
for water at the spring — go quick, and quick back with it.

The suitors will not be long out of the hall this morning:

they will come very early.

It is festival for everyone today."
So she spoke;

and they listened well and obeyed:

twenty went off to the spring of dark water,
and the others worked away skillfully about the house.

Then the Achaeans' serving-men came in, and split
firewood, well and skillfully;

and the women came back
from the spring;

and after them came the swineherd,
driving three fatted hogs, the best of all he had.

He left them to feed at large in the fine yard-fences,
and himself spoke to Odysseus, and his words were kind:

"Stranger — do the Achaeans look on you any better now,
or do they still dishonor you through the hall, as before?"
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered him:

"Ah, Eumaeus, may the gods pay back the outrage
these men in their insolence keep devising —
reckless things, in another man's house.

They have no share of shame."
So they spoke to one another of such things.

And Melanthius came up close to them, the goatherd,
driving the goats that stood out in all the herds,
a dinner for the suitors;

and two herdsmen followed with him.

He tethered the goats under the echoing porch,
and himself spoke to Odysseus, and his words were taunts:

"Stranger — still here?

Still going to plague this house,
begging from the men?

Still not out the door?

I don't imagine, now, we two will settle this business
before we've tasted each other's fists.

There is no decency
in the way you beg.

And there are other feasts among the Achaeans."
So he spoke;

and Odysseus of the many designs said nothing:

he only shook his head, silent, brooding evils deep in his heart.

And a third came in upon them — Philoetius, a leader of men,
driving a barren heifer for the suitors, and fat goats.

Ferrymen had brought them over — the ones who carry
other travelers too, whoever comes to them.

He tethered his beasts well under the echoing porch,
and came up close to the swineherd and asked him:

"Swineherd — who is this stranger, newly come
to our house?

What men does he claim for his people?

Where are his family and his fathers' fields?

Poor devil — and yet, truly, in build he is like a lord, a king.

But the gods sink far-wandering men in misery
when they spin hard sorrow even for kings."
He spoke, and coming up he gave him his right hand in welcome,
and lifting his voice he spoke winged words:

"Your health, father stranger!

May happiness be yours
in time to come — though now you are held fast in many evils.