But while shining Aphrodite was on her way to high Olympus
to ask for the girls the crown of blossoming marriage —
gone to Zeus who delights in thunder, for he knows all things well,
the fortune and the misfortune of mortal men —
meanwhile the snatching-winds carried the girls away
and gave them over to the hateful Furies, to serve them.

So may the dwellers on Olympus blot me out of sight,
or fair-braided Artemis strike me, that with Odysseus
before my eyes I may pass even under the hateful earth,
and never gladden the mind of a lesser man.

And yet an evil is bearable, when a person
weeps through the days, grieved to the packed core of the heart,
and the nights hold sleep at least — for sleep makes one forget
everything, the good and the bad, once it has wrapped the eyelids —
but to me the god sends evil even in dreams.

For this very night one slept beside me — like him,
his very likeness as he was when he went with the army;

and my heart
rejoiced:

I thought it no dream, but the waking truth at last."
So she spoke;

and at once Dawn of the golden throne came on.

And noble Odysseus caught the sound of her weeping,
and mused;

and it seemed to him, in the drift of his heart,
that she knew him already, and stood beside his head.

He gathered up the mantle and the fleeces he had slept in
and set them on a chair in the hall;

the oxhide
he carried outside and laid down;

and lifting his hands he prayed to Zeus:

"Father Zeus — if you gods willed it, and brought me home
over dry land and water, after all your hard usage,
let someone of the people waking in the house speak me
a word of omen;

and outside, let another sign of Zeus appear."
So he prayed;

and Zeus the counselor heard him,
and at once he thundered out of gleaming Olympus,
down from on high, out of the clouds.

And noble Odysseus was glad.

And the word of omen came from a woman grinding at the mill,
close by, where the mills of the shepherd of the people stood.

Twelve women in all kept them turning,
making barley meal and wheat flour, the marrow of men.

The others were asleep, their wheat all ground;

only one had not finished — the frailest one of all.

She stopped her stone now, and spoke the word — a sign for her master:

"Father Zeus, you who rule the gods and mankind:

how loud you thundered out of the starry sky —
and no cloud anywhere!

You show this as a sign to someone.

Then accomplish now for wretched me the word I say:

may the suitors, on this day, for the last and latest time,
take up their lovely feasting in the halls of Odysseus —
the men who have loosed my knees with heart-grinding labor
as I make their barley meal:

may they sup now their last!"
So she spoke;

and noble Odysseus rejoiced at the omen of her word
and at the thunder of Zeus.

He told himself the guilty would pay.

Now the other slave-women, gathering in the beautiful house of Odysseus,
were kindling on the hearth the never-wearying fire.

And Telemachus rose from his bed, a man like a god,
and put on his clothes, and hung his sharp sword at his shoulder,
and under his shining feet he bound the beautiful sandals,
and took his strong spear, tipped with sharpened bronze,
and paused on the threshold, and said to Eurycleia:

"Dear nurse, have you honored the stranger in our house
with bed and food?

Or does he lie untended, as he may?

That is my mother's way — sensible woman though she is:

she honors the worse of mortal men on impulse,
and sends the better man away unhonored."
Then watchful-minded Eurycleia answered him:

"Child, do not blame the blameless woman now.

He sat and drank his wine as long as he himself would;

and bread — he said he hungered for none:

she asked him.

And when he began to think of rest and sleep,
she told the slave-women to spread him a proper bed;