"No, by Zeus, Agelaus — and by the sufferings of my father,
who far from Ithaca has perished, or still wanders:

I do not delay my mother's marriage.

I urge her
to wed the man she chooses;

and I offer gifts past counting.

But I am ashamed to drive her from the hall against her will
with a word of compulsion.

May god never bring that to pass."
So spoke Telemachus.

And in the suitors Pallas Athena
set off unquenchable laughter, and knocked their wits askew.

And now they were laughing with jaws no longer their own;

the meat they ate was dabbled in blood;

and their eyes
brimmed full of tears;

and the heart in them wanted to wail.

And godlike Theoclymenus spoke out among them:

"Wretched men — what evil is this you suffer?

Night — your heads
are shrouded in night, and your faces, and your knees beneath;

wailing has caught like fire;

cheeks are streaming tears;

the walls are spattered with blood, and the fine crossbeams;

and the porch is full of ghosts — the courtyard full of them —
ghosts hurrying down to Erebus, under the gloom;

the sun
has perished out of the sky, and an evil mist runs over everything."
So he spoke;

and they all laughed at him sweetly.

And Eurymachus, Polybus' son, began to speak among them:

"The stranger is raving — this new one, fresh from abroad.

Quick, young men — see him out of the house and on his way
to the assembly-place, since he finds it night in here."
Then godlike Theoclymenus said to him:

"Eurymachus, I ask no escort of you for my going.

I have eyes, and ears, and both my feet,
and a mind in my breast in no way meanly made.

With these I am going out that door — for I see evil coming
on you, evil no man will escape or dodge,
no man of you suitors, you who in the house of godlike Odysseus
batter men with outrage and devise your reckless deeds."
So speaking he went out of the well-settled house
and came to Piraeus, who received him gladly.

And the suitors all, eyeing one another,
went to work needling Telemachus, laughing at his guests;

and a man of the arrogant young men would say:

"Telemachus, no man is unluckier in his guests than you.

Look at this one you keep — this pawed-over vagrant
who wants his bread and wine, who has no skill for work
and no strength either:

a dead weight on the good earth.

And then the other one — he stood up to play the prophet!

If you would listen to me, the profit is all yours:

let us pitch your guests into a many-benched ship
and send them to the Sicilians.

There they would fetch you a worthy price."
So the suitors talked;

but he took no heed of their words.

He watched his father in silence — waiting, always,
for the moment he would lay his hands on the shameless suitors.

And she — she had set her beautiful chair across from them:

Icarius' daughter, watchful-minded Penelope,
and heard each man's word in the halls.

For laughing they had made their dinner ready —
a sweet meal and a hearty one, for they had slaughtered lavishly.

But no supper could ever be more graceless than the supper
a goddess and a strong man were soon now to set
before them.

For they had begun it:

the shameful devising was theirs.

---