Meanwhile Circe had bathed all the other companions within her
palace with tender attention, and rubbed them richly with olive
oil, and dressed them in fleecy cloaks and in tunics beneath them.

All of the men we discovered at generous feasting within there.

When they beheld one another and knew every face that confronted
theirs, they lamented and wept, and the whole house echoed around them.

Close she approached and addressed me, the radiant one among goddesses:

“Let no more of this swelling lamentation trouble the household.

I myself know well what you suffered upon the fish-teeming
sea, and the wrongs that malicious men have inflicted on dry land.

Come now, eat of your food and partake of the wine that is waiting,
till you recover again in your breasts that spirited courage
held when you first left behind you the soil of the country of fathers,
ruggedly coasted Ithaca.

Now you are withered and spiritless,
always recalling the pain of the difficult wandering;

never
does your heart turn to feasting, for truly your suffering was heavy.”
Thus did she speak, and our proud hearts consented and yielded within us.

There, as the days made their courses, the whole full circle of one year,
feasting we sat upon meat beyond counting and sweet wine beside it.

But when the year had passed, and the seasons had turned in their orbit,
months began waning away, and the long days came to completion;

then my companions, the faithful, called me aside and addressed me:

“Strange one, remember at last the land of your fathers;

the season
now has arrived, if indeed it is fated that you shall be rescued,
coming again to your high-roofed house and the land of your fathers.”
Thus did they speak, and the proud heart within me consented and yielded.

So through the whole of the day till the light of the sun had descended,
feasting we sat upon meat beyond counting and sweet wine beside it.

But when the sun went down and the sacred darkness had gathered,
all of the men lay down in the shadowy halls of the palace.

I, going up to the bed of surpassing beauty of Circe,
clasped both her knees in my hands as a suppliant;

the goddess attended.

Raising my voice, I addressed her, and these words took wing as I uttered:

“Circe, fulfill now the promise you gave me and send me to homeland;

already my spirit is eager to go, and the hearts of the others;

all of them wear out my heart as they gather around me in mourning,
whenever you are away and not in the hall to restrain them.”
Thus did I speak, and at once the radiant goddess responded:

“Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus endlessly resourceful,
you shall no longer remain in my house when your wishes oppose it.

Yet there is first one other journey that you must accomplish:

into the house of Hades and dread Persephone you must
go, to inquire of the spirit of Theban Tiresias, prophet
blind in his eyes, but whose understanding remains unimpaired still.

Even in death Persephone granted him thoughtful perception,
him alone;

all the others are shadows that flutter about him.”
Thus did she speak, and the dear heart within me was broken completely.

There on the bed I sat and wept;

and the spirit within me
wished no longer to live and to look on the brightness of sunlight.

But when I had grown weary of weeping and writhing in anguish,
then I addressed her in answer and spoke these words to the goddess:

“Circe, who will be guide on the course of this difficult journey?

No man yet in a black ship ever has sailed into Hades.”
Thus did I speak, and at once the radiant goddess responded:

“Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus endlessly resourceful,
let no concern for a pilot aboard your vessel distress you.

Set up the mast and extend on its yards the glistening white sails,
then take your seat;