Then, when they entered the glorious house, they discovered the king’s wife,
huge as the peak of a mountain, and felt an abhorrence in seeing.

Straightway she called from the meeting place the renowned Antiphates,
husband who married her, and he devised their pitiful ruin.

Seizing one man from among my companions, he made him his dinner;

other two men leaped away and flew to the ships in their terror.

Then through the town he raised up the cry of the war;

when they heard it,
mighty Laestrygonian men came in throngs from all directions,
thousands, and not like humanity, rather resembling the Giants.

Down from the cliffs they were casting great stones with the weight of a strong man;

straightway there rose from the ships an evil and terrible clamor,
screaming of dying men and the crushing of vessels to pieces.

Spearing the men there like fish, they carried their hideous dinner.

While they destroyed all the people inside of the deep-sided harbor,
then I drew out the sharp-edged sword that I carried beside my
thigh, cutting all of the cables that held the dark-blue-prowed vessel.

Rapidly then I aroused my companions and gave them commandment,
telling them all to bend into oars and escape from the evil;

all of them tore up the sea at once in their terror of dying.

Gladly my own ship fled to the open sea-water and safety,
leaving the beetling cliffs;

all the other vessels were ruined.

There we continued our sailing away with the heart full of sorrow,
glad to be free from death though our well-loved comrades had perished.

Then we came to Aeaea’s island, where beautiful-haired and
terrible Circe resided, a goddess with voice like a mortal,
sister by blood of Aeetes, the god with a dangerous spirit;

both had been born to the light-giving Helios, joined with their mother
Perse, herself a daughter whom Ocean brought into being.

There we brought in the vessel without any sound to the shoreline,
into a ship-holding harbor, and some god directed our passage.

There we departed the ship, and for two days long and two nights there
down we lay, consuming our hearts with exhaustion and sorrow.

Yet when the beautiful-haired Dawn brought the third day upon us,
then I took hold of the spear and the sharp-edged sword that I carried,
climbing away from the ship to a place for observing the country,
hoping to see works made by humanity, hoping for voices.

Up to a broken height I ascended and there took my station;

smoke I perceived as it rose from the earth with its widely traveled
roads, in the halls of the goddess through thick-growing brush and the timber.

Then in the depth of my mind and my heart I considered the question,
whether to go and examine the place where the fire-bright smoke rose.

Yet as I pondered, this seemed in my thinking the better decision:

first to return to the ship on the shore of the salt-colored water,
give my companions a meal and then send men to learn of the country.

Yet when I traveled the road and came near to the curve-sided vessel,
then some divinity pitied my loneliness there and provided
one tall-antlered and mighty stag in the road where I traveled.

Out of the forested pasture the stag was descending to river,
there for his drink, since the strength of the sun beat down on his body.

Then as he stepped from the woodland, I struck in the middle of back there;

clean through the stag did my bronze spear run and emerge on the far side.

Down in the dust with a cry he dropped, and his spirit departed.

Setting my foot on his body, I pulled out the bronze-headed spearpoint,
out of the wound, and I laid it aside on the ground where I stood there.