You must be lord Odysseus, the man who has manifold turnings,
whom the gold-wanded slayer of Argus repeatedly told me
would come here on his homeward return out of Troy in the swift ship.

Come now, place in its sheath the sword that you carry, and let us
two climb into my bed, so we, being mingled together
there in the labor of love, may learn to have trust in each other.”
Thus did she speak, and I spoke to the goddess and gave her an answer:

“Circe, how can you now command me to act with a kindness,
you who have made my companions into pigs in your palace,
keeping me now in this place and designing deceit when you call me
into your chamber and ask me to climb in the bed where you slumber,
so when I stand there naked you make me a coward and unman me?

Never shall I be willing to climb in the bed where you slumber,
not till you bring yourself, goddess, to swear by the gods’ mighty oath there
you are not planning to bring any further affliction upon me.”
Thus did I speak, and she straightway swore as I asked and commanded.

Then, when she finished the oath and had sworn every word to completion,
I climbed into the beautiful bed of the goddess Circe.

Meanwhile, four serving women were working around in the palace,
women whose labor attended the house of the goddess in order.

They are the daughters of springs and the forests and beautiful rivers,
sacred, that flow in their course till they enter the salt-colored sea-way.

One on the chairs threw beautiful covers of purple above them,
first having spread smooth linen beneath all the beautiful fabric;

one drew the silver tables in front of the chairs for the feasting,
setting the baskets fashioned of gold on the tables in order;

one mixed up in a silver bowl honey-hearted and sweet wine,
then she distributed drinking cups that were fashioned of gold-work;

fourth brought water and kindled a powerful fire underneath the
mighty enormous cauldron, and water was heated within it.

Then, when the water had boiled in the brightly shining bronze cauldron,
into the bathtub she set me and bathed from the mighty container,
tempering water to suit my desire as she poured it from head down to shoulders,
till she removed from my limbs all the weariness wasting my spirit.

Then, when she bathed me and richly anointed my body with olive oil,
casting around me a beautiful cloak and a tunic for clothing,
into the palace she led me and seated me there on a silver-
studded chair beautifully and elaborately fashioned, with footstool.

Then an attendant brought water for washing my hands in a pitcher,
beautiful, fashioned of gold, and she poured it above a great silver
basin for washing;

beside me she drew up a table with polish.

Then the respected housekeeper carried the bread and set it
there before me with manifold dishes, and gave of her stores freely,
urging my eating;

my heart did not wish to partake of the banquet.

There I was sitting with thoughts turned elsewhere and evil foreboding.

Then, when Circe observed me sitting and not putting forward
hands to the bread, and possessed by a terrible grief in my spirit,
close she approached and addressed me, and these words took wing as she uttered:

“Why do you sit there, Odysseus, a man who is stricken with silence,
eating the heart in your body and touching no food and no drinking?

Do you suspect yet another deception?

You have no reason
now to be frightened, since I have already sworn the strong oath to you.”
Thus did she speak, and I spoke to the goddess and gave her an answer:

“Circe, what man who possesses a sense of appropriate conduct
ever could bring himself willingly food or a drink to be tasting,
not till he freed his companions and saw with his eyes they were living?