inside they heard Circe singing aloud with a beautiful voice there,
moving around at a great loom, deathless and never decaying,
weaving the fine-spun, beautiful, graceful, and shining work of a goddess.

Then Polites started to speak to the men who were standing around him,
leader of people and closest to me and the dearest companion:

“Friends, there is someone inside by the mighty loom who is moving,
beautifully singing, and all of the floor of the palace is humming,
whether a goddess or mortal;

come, let us call to her loudly.”
Thus did he speak, and they lifted their voices and called to the woman.

Straightway she came from the palace and opened the beautiful doorway,
calling them inward;

in innocence all of the men went behind her.

Only Eurylochus stayed at the back, for he feared a deception.

Into the palace she led them and seated them there upon benches;

cheese and barley meal and the pale-colored honey she stirred them,
mixed into Pramnian wine, while she blended within it a measure of
ruinous drugs, so the men should forget the beloved land of their fathers.

Then, when she gave it and they drank down what she offered completely,
striking them there with her wand, she confined them within the pigsties.

Heads of the pigs they possessed and the voice and the bristles and body;

minds were unaltered within them and stayed as they had been beforehand.

Thus they were penned while they wept;

and Circe provided them acorns,
fruit of the oak and the ilex and cornel berries for feeding,
such as are eaten by pigs that continually wallow on earth there.

Then Eurylochus came running again to the swift black vessel,
bringing the news of our comrades and all of their bitter destruction.

Yet not a word could he bring himself forth, though he strained to be speaking,
stricken at heart by the anguish;

his eyes were filled up with teardrops,
while in his spirit was nothing but sorrow and grieving lament there.

Yet when we all in amazement inquired about what had befallen,
then he related the ruin of all our companions who traveled:

“We went off through the brush as commanded by glorious lord Odysseus;

there in a forested glen we discovered a beautiful palace,
built out of polished stones in a place that commanded the landscape.

There by the side of a great loom someone was singing with clear voice,
whether a goddess or mortal;

they lifted their voices and called her.

Straightway she came from the palace and opened the beautiful doorway,
calling them inward;

in innocence all of the men went behind her.

Yet I remained at the back, since I feared there might be a deception.

All of the men disappeared there together, and none of them ever
came to my eyesight again, though long I was sitting and watching.”
Thus did he speak;

and around my shoulders I slung the great silver-
studded bronze sword and the bow, and commanded the man to return and
lead me again on the selfsame road by which he had come there.

Yet he embraced both my knees, taking hold with his two hands together;

wailing, he spoke to me then, and the words that he uttered took wing there:

“Zeus-born, do not now take me back there against my intention;

leave me.

I know you shall not come back by yourself or return with another
one of the men you attend.

With those who remain let us hurry,
fleeing, since even now we may still get away from the death-day.”
Thus did he speak, and I spoke to the man and provided an answer:

“Lord Eurylochus, stay in this place and remain where you are now,
eating and drinking beside the hollow and black-hulled vessel.

Yet I shall go, for a mighty necessity lies on my body.”
Thus having spoken, I went from the vessel and shore of the sea-way.