for the breath of the North Wind will carry her onward.

But when your ship has completed the passage across the Ocean,
there is a low shore standing, and Persephone’s sacred woodlands,
tall-growing poplars of darkness and willows that scatter their fruit young.

Beach your ship at the edge of the Ocean’s deep-running waters;

you must advance by yourself to the dank domain of the death-god.

There into Acheron flow Pyriphlegethon’s fire-bearing waters,
also Cocytus, a stream that is branched from the water of Styx there;

there is a rock at the place where the thundering rivers are meeting.

Hero, draw close to the rock, and precisely obey my directions:

dig out a trench that extends for a cubit in each of its measures;

pour a libation around it for all of the people departed,
honey and milk being first, then sweet wine poured as the second,
water the third;

and on these you must sprinkle the white flour of barley.

Earnestly pray to the strengthless heads of the dead and entreat them,
vowing that, after your coming to Ithaca, there in your palace
you will give them your best barren cow and heap treasures for burning;

then for Tiresias alone you will slaughter a black-fleeced
ram that excels all the others in strength and in worth in your sheepfold.

When you have prayed to the glorious nation of dead men and women,
slaughter a black ewe there with a ram, and bend both of their faces
downward to Erebus;

turn yourself toward the streams of the river.

Then in their multitudes there will gather around you the spirits,
souls of the people who died and have passed from the world of the living.

Order your men and encourage them then to be skinning the carcasses,
sheep that lie slaughtered there by the pitiless bronze of the weapon;

let them be burned and prayers be offered before the immortals,
powerful Hades and dread Persephone, queen of the darkness.

Draw for yourself the sharp-edged sword from beside your strong thigh there;

sit, and allow no strengthless head of the people departed
near to the blood until you have questioned Tiresias fully.

Swiftly the seer will come to your side, O leader of peoples;

he will reveal to you then the road and the measure of journey,
also the means of your homecoming over the fish-teeming sea-depths.”
Thus did she speak;

and at once came Dawn on her gold-glimmering throne-seat.

Then she arrayed me in garments, a cloak with a tunic beneath it;

she, the divine nymph, covered herself with a great shining silver
mantle, both finely and gracefully woven, and girded her waist with
beautiful gold, and above on her head she adjusted a long veil.

I made my way through the hall and aroused my companions from slumber,
standing beside every man and exhorting him gently in order:

“No more lying asleep in the sweetness of drowsing and slumber.

Let us depart;

for the queenly Circe has shown me the pathway.”
Thus did I speak, and their proud hearts consented and yielded within them.

Yet not even from there did I lead every comrade uninjured.

One, Elpenor, the youngest among us, was sleeping above them,
neither a powerful warrior nor greatly sound in his judgment;

he had lain down far apart from his friends in the sacred enclosure,
heavy with wine and desiring the coolness, atop Circe’s palace.

Hearing the noise and commotion of all his companions departing,
suddenly up he leapt, and he did not remember, befuddled,
he must return by descending the long-built ladder below him;

headlong he fell from the roof, and the bones of his neck were completely
snapped from the spine, and his spirit descended to Hades’ dominion.

As the companions were starting to go, I addressed them in order:

“You are perhaps supposing that now you are going to your own
cherished country;