Then I pulled upward the brushwood and gathered the flexible willow,
plaiting a rope that was one fathom long and was thoroughly twisted,
binding together the feet of the beast with the mighty proportions.

Down to the black-hulled ship I returned with the stag on my shoulders,
leaning my weight on the spear, since never upon a single shoulder,
using one hand, could I carry the creature;

the beast was enormous.

Down by the ship I cast it and roused all the men from their sorrow,
using the gentle words as beside every man I was standing:

“Friends, though we grieve, we shall not yet descend to the house of great Hades,
not till the day that is destined.

Come then, while food and provisions
still are retained in the swift ship, let us attend to our eating,
lest being empty of food we are worn and destroyed by our hunger.”
Thus did I speak, and they rapidly gave their attention and answered;

taking the cloaks from their heads by the shore of the barren salt sea there,
all of them marveled to see the great stag, for the beast was enormous.

Then, when they took in their hearts full delight in the sight of the stag there,
washing their hands, they prepared and made ready the glorious banquet.

So then all day long till the sun and the light were descending,
there we sat feasting on meat past counting and sweet wine beside it.

Then the sun entered the west and the darkness descended around us;

there we lay down to sleep on the surf-line there at the seashore.

When early Dawn had appeared with her beautiful rose-colored fingers,
then I called all my men in assembly and spoke to them openly:

“Hear now my words, my companions, although you are greatly afflicted.

Friends, we know not where darkness is found or the Dawn where she rises,
neither where Sun who gives light to humanity enters beneath the
earth nor where he arises.

Come, let us consider, and quickly,
whether a plan is remaining for us;

I do not believe it.

Up to a broken height I ascended and saw from its outlook
one island lying encircled by boundless expanses of ocean;

low is the island itself, and the smoke in the midst of the island
rose to my eyes from the brush that was thick and the timber around it.”
Thus did I speak, and the hearts in the depth of their bodies were broken,
holding in mind deeds done by Laestrygonian Antiphates,
also the violent deed of the man-eating mighty Cyclops.

Loudly they wept, and the great tears flowed from their eyes in abundance,
yet no advantage or use was accomplished by all their lamenting.

Then I divided the whole of my strong-greaved men who attended
into two groups, and provided a leader to each of the parties.

I led one band, and the other was led by the godlike Eurylochus.

Quickly we shook all the lots in a helmet constructed of bronze-work;

out leaped the lot that belonged to the great-hearted lord Eurylochus.

Thus he departed, and two-and-twenty men with him traveled,
weeping, and leaving us weeping as well when they went on their journey.

There in a forested glen they discovered the palace of Circe,
built out of polished stones in a place that commanded the landscape.

Mountain-bred wolves were all around it and lions beside them,
beasts that the goddess herself had bewitched when she gave them her evil drugs there.

Yet they attacked not the men or arose in a violent onslaught;

standing, they fawned all around them and waved their long tails in excitement.

Just as the dogs fawn around their master returning from banquet,
since he is always accustomed to carry some sweet-tasting morsels,
so did the strongly clawed wolves and the lions fawn all around them;

they at the sight of the huge and terrible creatures were frightened.

There in the gateway they stood of the beautiful-haired shining goddess;