Next we arrived at Aeolian island, where Aeolus made his
home, Hippotas’ son, who was dear to the deathless immortals.

Floating the island remained;

all around it a wall had been fashioned,
bronze and unbreakable, while from the sea rose the cliff without foothold.

Twelve of his children were born and were living with him in the palace,
six were daughters and six were sons in the flower of manhood;

daughters he gave to his sons to possess as their wives in the household.

Always they feast at the side of their dear and beloved father
also their reverend mother, and good things uncounted are near them.

All day long is the house filled with savory fragrance, the courtyard
ringing with sound;

but at nighttime they sleep with their reverend women,
lying in blankets together on well-corded bedsteads in chambers.

Into their city we came and the beautiful house of Aeolus.

One month long he attended me well and inquired about all things,
Ilium, Argive vessels, and homeward return of Achaeans;

all of the tale in appropriate order I told and related.

Then, when I asked in my turn for the road and entreated his sending,
nothing did he refuse, but prepared my return to the homeland.

Then he presented a bag made out of the flayed hide of one great
ox nine years old, and inside he confined all the blustering windstorms.

Son of great Cronos had made him the steward who ruled over all winds,
either to halt or arouse any wind as his spirit desired it.

There in the hollow ship he secured it with shining and silver
cord, so not even the smallest of breaths might escape from the bag there.

Then he released for my passage the blowing breath of the West Wind,
carrying all of the vessels and men, but the purpose was never
fated to come to completion;

our folly was destined to ruin us.

Nine days long we continued our sailing by daytime and nighttime;

then on the tenth day the fields of our fathers were rising before us,
close, and we saw human people attending the fires they had kindled.

Then sweet sleep came down on me, exhausted by ceaseless exertion;

all that time I had managed the sheet of the ship by myself there,
giving it over to no other comrade, to hasten our homeward arrival.

Then my companions began to converse with each other around me,
saying that silver and gold I was carrying into my homeland,
given as gifts by the great-hearted lord Aeolus, son of Hippotas.

Thus would a man glance aside at his neighbor and speak in this manner:

“See how greatly he always is loved and receives every honor
out of humanity, whatever the city or country he comes to.

See what abundance of beautiful treasure he carries from Troy-land,
all of his plunder, while we who have finished the selfsame long journey
come to our country with nothing at all in our hands from the labor.

Now lord Aeolus gave him these things out of friendship and favor.

Come, let us quickly examine the bag and discover its contents,
learning how much of the gold and the silver is held in the bag there.”
Thus they conversed, and the evil advice of my comrades prevailed there.

Opening up the great bag, they released every wind from its binding;

straightway the storm winds seized them and swept them away over water,
weeping, afar from their fathers’ land;

and I, suddenly waking,
pondered there in the depth of my own great and blameless spirit
whether to drop from the ship and be drowned in the salt-colored water,
or to endure it in silence and stay there among those still living.

I stayed and I endured;

and covering over my head there,
down in the ship I lay, while the vessels were carried by evil
blast of the storm to Aeolian island, my comrades lamenting.