Just as I traveled the sacred glens and was nearly arriving
there at the mighty palace of Circe, the goddess of many drugs there,
Hermes who carries the golden wand on my journey approached me,
taking the form of a man in his youth as I came to the palace,
first-growing down on his lip in the loveliest season of young life.

Taking my hand in his own, he spoke and addressed me directly:

“Where, sorrowful doomed man, do you walk through the hills all alone here,
ignorant of the country?

Your men in the palace of Circe
now are confined like pigs in the thick-covered sties where she holds them.

Do you go there to release them?

Yourself shall never return from
out of the palace, I tell you, but stay where the others are staying.

Come, I shall free you from evil myself and shall bring you to safety.

Here is a powerful drug you must carry inside Circe’s palace;

this shall avert from your head the arrival of pitiless death-day.

I shall relate all Circe’s designs that shall bring you destruction.

She shall prepare you a potion and cast in the dish many drugs there;

even so, she cannot enchant you at all, for the powerful
medicine I shall provide shall prevent her.

I shall explain everything.

Just when the goddess Circe attacks with her long wand against you,
draw from beside your thigh the sharp-edged sword that you carry,
leap upon Circe as though you are truly intending to kill her.

She shall be seized with terror and ask you to enter her bed there.

Do not refuse to lie in the bed of the goddess when asked there,
if you desire she release your companions and welcome you kindly;

yet you must order the goddess to swear by the gods’ mighty oath there
she is not planning to bring any further affliction upon you,
lest when you stand there naked she make you a coward and unman you.”
Thus having spoken, the slayer of Argus presented the medicine,
pulling it out of the earth, and he showed me the form it presented:

black at the root, but its flower appeared to my eyes to be milk-white.

Moly immortals call it, and hard is the labor for mortals
digging it up, but the gods have the power to do every action.

Then lord Hermes departed across the tree-covered island,
going to high Olympus;

but I went onward to Circe’s
palace, and many dark thoughts moved through the heart in my body.

There at the doors of the beautiful-haired shining goddess I halted,
standing and calling aloud, and the goddess attended my outcry.

Straightway she came from the palace and opened the beautiful doorway,
calling me inward;

I went at her side with the heart full of sorrow.

Into the palace she led me and seated me there on a silver-
studded chair beautifully and elaborately fashioned, with footstool.

Then in a golden cup she prepared me a potion for drinking,
slipping a drug in the mixture, with evil intent in her spirit.

Then, when she gave it, I drank, and the potion in no way bewitched me;

striking me there with her wand, she spoke and addressed me directly:

“Go to the pigsty now and lie down beside your companions.”
Thus did she speak;

from beside my thigh I drew out the sharp sword,
leaping at Circe as though I were truly intending to kill her.

Shrieking, she ran underneath the great blade and embraced both my knees there;

wailing, she spoke to me then, and the words that she uttered took wing there:

“Who are you, whence have you come, and where are your city and parents?

Wonder possesses me now that the drugs you have drunk have not changed you;

never another man has endured these drugs without changing,
once he had drunk and they passed the defensive enclosure of tooth-row.

Surely the mind in your breast must possess an enchantment-proof nature.