There we set foot on the dry land and drew up an ample supply of
water, and quickly my men took their meal at the side of the swift ships.

Then, when we tasted our measure of food and the drink we were given,
taking a herald beside me and one of the men as companion,
into the famous house of Aeolus I went, and I found him
feasting beside both his wife and the children who lived in his household.

Into the house we entered and sat by the jambs of the doorway,
there on the threshold;

they marveled at heart and inquired of my journey:

“Why have you come here, Odysseus?

What evil divinity harmed you?

Surely we sent you with every provision, so you might arrive in
your fatherland and your house or whatever location is dearest unto you.”
Thus did they speak, and I answered them while in my heart I was grieving:

“Evil companions have ruined me, they and a pitiless slumber.

Friends, bring a cure, since the power to do so is held in your own hands.”
Thus did I speak and entreat them with words that were gentle and soothing;

they became silent, and then the old father addressed me in answer:

“Out of the island at once, most despicable creature now living!

It is against what is right that I welcome or send on his journey
anyone hated this way by the gods who are blessed and immortal.

Out, since you come to this island abhorred by the gods everlasting.”
Thus having spoken, he sent me away while I heavily groaned there.

There we continued our sailing away with the heart full of sorrow,
while the strength of the men was destroyed by the wearisome rowing,
all our own fault, since no following wind would appear for our voyage.

Six days long we continued our sailing by daytime and nighttime;

then on the seventh day we came to the steep-built citadel Lamus,
Telepylus in the land of Laestrygonians, where one herdsman
driving the livestock in hails the herdsman who drives outward.

There an unsleeping man could have earned for himself double wages,
one wage tending the cattle and one for the silver-white sheep-flocks,
since very close are the paths that are followed by nighttime and daylight.

There we came into the glorious harbor, encircled by one cliff,
sheer and unbroken, extending around it on opposite margins;

two jutting headlands are standing across from each other and reach out
there at the mouth, and a narrow passage provides the sole entrance.

All of the others directed their curving vessels inside it,
mooring within the hollow harbor the ships in a close line;

never a wave was uplifted within it, whether enormous
or very small, but a shining calm spread outward around them.

Only myself held the black ship out of the mouth of the harbor,
there at its edge, and I fastened the cables secure to the cliff rock.

Up to a broken height I ascended and there took my station;

nowhere the labors of oxen or mortals appeared to our eyesight;

only we saw smoke rising aloft from the land in the distance.

Then I sent several companions ahead of the others to find out
what kind of men in the country were eating their bread on the earth there.

Two men I chose for the journey and added a third as their herald.

Out on the land they went and followed a level road, where the wagons
carried the wood to the town from the towering crests of the mountains.

There before reaching the city they met a young woman who drew down
water, the strong daughter born to Laestrygonian Antiphates.

She had descended to Artacia’s beautifully flowing
spring, out of which all the people were carrying water to town there.

Coming beside her, they spoke to the girl and inquired of the ruler,
who was the king of the people and who were the people he governed.

Straightway she pointed the high-roofed house of her father before them.