If in good faith you are urging that I now be drinking and eating,
free all the men, so my eyes may behold my companions, the faithful.”
Thus did I speak;

and the goddess went out through the hall with her wand there,
opening up all the doors of the pigsty and driving them outward,
still in the form of the pigs that are nine years old and well fattened.

There they were standing in front of the goddess, and moving among them,
Circe anointed each man with a different magical drug there.

Then all the bristles the ruinous drug had made grow on their bodies,
that which the queenly Circe had given them, fell from their members.

Men they became once again, and younger than ever beforehand,
greatly more beautiful also and taller to look at in stature.

All recognized me, and each took hold of my hands in his own hands;

passionate weeping possessed every man, and the house all around us
rang with a terrible sound;

even Circe was moved into pity.

Close she approached and addressed me, the radiant one among goddesses:

“Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus endlessly resourceful,
go to the swift-running ship and the shore of the sea without lingering.

First you must haul the vessel ashore on the dry land above it,
stowing your cargo and all of the ship’s equipment in caverns;

then come yourself once again, and bring your companions, the faithful.”
Thus did she speak, and the proud heart within me consented and yielded.

Down to the swift-running ship and the shore of the sea I proceeded;

there by the swift-running ship I discovered my faithful companions,
pitifully lamenting and letting the great tears fall from them.

Just as the calves of the farmyard will gather around all the cattle
coming back filled from their grazing into the yard of the dunghill,
frisking together to meet them—the fences no longer restrain them,
but with incessant lowing they run round the sides of their mothers—
so, when the men with their eyes had perceived me, around me they crowded,
weeping;

and deep in their hearts it appeared they had come to their homeland,
come to the city itself and the soil of the country that bore them,
ruggedly coasted Ithaca, where they were nourished and nurtured.

Wailing aloud, they addressed me, and these words took wing as they uttered:

“Zeus-reared man, your return brings joy to us all in our sorrow,
even as though we had come to our homeland, the country of fathers.

Come now, tell of the death and destruction that took our companions.”
Thus did they speak, and I answered them all with compassionate language:

“First we must haul the vessel ashore on the dry land above it,
stowing our cargo and all of the ship’s equipment in caverns;

then bestir yourselves, every man, and come with me swiftly,
so you may look on your friends in the sacred palace of Circe,
eating and drinking their fill, for their stores are forever abundant.”
Thus did I speak, and the men gave heed to the word I had spoken.

Only Eurylochus tried to restrain all the other companions;

raising his voice, he addressed them, and these words took wing as he uttered:

“Pitiful men, where are we going?

Why hunger for evils,
entering Circe’s palace, where she will transform us completely,
making us pigs, or perhaps into wolves, or perhaps into lions,
forced to be guards of her mighty house and remain there forever,
just as the Cyclops treated our friends when they entered his courtyard,
led by the reckless Odysseus, who went there among them,
since by this man’s blind folly those comrades also were slaughtered.”
Thus did he speak;