I am young myself, and have no faith yet in my hands
to defend a man, when someone picks a quarrel first.

And my mother's heart is divided in her breast, two ways:

whether to stay here with me and keep the house,
respecting her husband's bed and the voice of the people,
or to follow now whichever of the Achaeans is best
among her suitors in the halls, and offers the most.

But as for this guest, since he has come to your house,
I will dress him in a cloak and a tunic, fine clothing,
and give him a two-edged sword, and sandals for his feet,
and send him wherever his heart and spirit bid him go.

Or if you will, keep him and care for him at the farmstead,
and I will send clothing here, and all his bread
to eat, so he will not wear you down, you and your men.

But in among the suitors I would not let him
go:

too reckless is the insolence they carry —
they would mock him, and it would be a terrible grief to me.

It is hard for one man to get anything done among many,
even a strong man:

they are far the more powerful."
Then much-enduring noble Odysseus spoke to him:

"Friend — since surely it is right for me to answer also —
truly my heart is eaten through as I listen,
hearing you tell what reckless things the suitors
devise in the halls, against the will of such a man as you.

Tell me:

do you bow to it willingly, or do the people
through the land hate you, following the voice of a god?

Or have you some fault to find with brothers — those a man
trusts to fight beside him, though a great feud rise?

Ah, would that I were as young as this anger of mine,
or were a son of blameless Odysseus, or the man himself —
then straightway might some stranger cut the head from my neck
if I did not walk into the hall of Laertes' son
Odysseus, and become an evil to every man of them.

And if they overpowered me by their numbers, alone as I am,
I would rather die cut down in my own halls
than look on forever at these disgraceful doings:

guests roughly handled, and men hauling the slave-women
shamefully through the beautiful house,
and wine drawn off and squandered, and them eating my bread
idly, recklessly, endlessly — for a work never to be finished."
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him:

"Then I will tell you, stranger, exactly how it is.

It is not that the whole people hates me and bears a grudge,
nor have I fault to find with brothers — those a man
trusts to fight beside him, though a great feud rise.

For so the son of Cronos has made ours a line of only sons:

Arceisius fathered Laertes, an only son;

his father got Odysseus, an only son;

and Odysseus
fathered only me, and left me in the halls, and had no joy of me.

And that is why enemies past counting are in the house.

All the great men who hold power among the islands —
Dulichium and Same and wooded Zacynthus —
and all who lord it through rocky Ithaca:

so many woo my mother, and wear this house away.

And she neither refuses the marriage she loathes, nor can she
bring it to an end.

And they eat on, wasting
my house.

Soon they will tear me to pieces too.

But surely these things lie on the knees of the gods.

Old father, you go — quickly — and tell steady-hearted Penelope
that I am safe for her, and have come back from Pylos.

I will stay here.

And you return to this place
when you have told her — her only.

Let none of the other Achaeans
learn it:

for there are many devising evil against me."
And you answered him, Eumaeus the swineherd:

"I know.

I understand.

You order a man who is thinking it too.

But come, tell me this, and tell it to me truly:

shall I go the same road with the news to Laertes
as well?