But if this word displeases you, and you choose instead
that he live, and keep all that was his father's —
then let us not go on gathering here to eat away
his store of pleasant things.

Let each man from his own hall
court her with bride-gifts, seeking her;

and she then
may wed the man who gives the most, and comes as her fate."
So he spoke;

and they all fell silent and still.

Then Amphinomus rose and spoke among them —
the shining son of Nisus, of the lord Aretias' line,
who from Dulichium, land of wheat and grass,
led the suitors;

and beyond the others he pleased
Penelope with his talk, for his mind was set on good.

With good intent he rose and spoke among them:

"Friends, I for one would have no wish to kill
Telemachus.

Dreadful it is to kill the blood of kings.

No — first let us ask what is the counsel of the gods.

If the ordinances of great Zeus approve it,
I will kill him myself, and bid all the rest to help;

but if the gods turn us aside, I say:

stop here."
So spoke Amphinomus, and his word pleased them well.

They rose at once and went to the house of Odysseus,
and coming in they sat on the polished chairs.

Then watchful-minded Penelope thought of one thing more:

to show herself to the suitors in their overweening insolence.

For she had learned of her son's death plotted in the halls —
the herald Medon told her, who had overheard their counsels.

She went down to the hall with her attendant women.

And when she reached the suitors, shining among women,
she stood beside the pillar of the close-built roof,
holding her glistening veil before her cheeks,
and rebuked Antinous, and spoke a word, and named him:

"Antinous — insolence itself, deviser of evils!

And they say
that in the land of Ithaca you are the best of your years
in counsel and in speech.

You were never such a man.

Madman!

Why do you weave death and doom for
Telemachus, and pay no heed to suppliants — over whom
Zeus stands witness?

It is unholy to weave evil against each other.

Do you not know the day your father came here in flight,
in terror of the people?

For they were bitterly enraged,
because he had joined with Taphian pirates
to harry the Thesprotians — men who were our allies.

They wanted to destroy him, to tear the dear heart out of him,
and to swallow his great and pleasing livelihood whole;

but Odysseus held them back and checked them, hot as they were.

His house you now eat up scot-free;

you woo his wife;

you would kill his son;

and me you grieve to the core.

Stop, I command you.

And command the rest to stop."
Then Eurymachus, Polybus' son, answered her:

"Daughter of Icarius, watchful-minded Penelope,
take heart.

Do not let these things trouble your mind.

The man does not exist, will not exist, cannot be born
who shall lay hands upon your son Telemachus
while I am alive and look upon the light of the earth.

For I will say this outright, and it will be accomplished:

in an instant his black blood would run down my spear —
that man's.

For Odysseus, sacker of cities — many a time
he sat me on his knees, and put roast meat
into my hands, and held the red wine to my lips.

And so Telemachus is to me by far the dearest
of all men;

and I tell him he need not tremble at death —
not from the suitors.

From the gods there is no escaping."
So he spoke to soothe her — and was himself preparing the boy's destruction.

But she climbed to her shining upper room,
and wept there for Odysseus, her dear husband, until
gray-eyed Athena cast sweet sleep upon her eyelids.

And at evening the noble swineherd came back
to Odysseus and his son.

They were making their supper,
busy about it, having killed a year-old pig.