But the two in the hut, Odysseus and the noble swineherd,
had lit a fire and were readying breakfast at dawn,
and had sent the herdsmen out with the gathered swine;

and around Telemachus the yapping dogs went fawning,
and did not bark as he came.

And noble Odysseus noticed
the dogs fawning, and the sound of footsteps came to him.

At once he spoke winged words to Eumaeus:

"Eumaeus, surely some companion of yours is coming,
or another man well known, since the dogs are not barking
but fawn around him;

and I hear the thud of feet."
The word was not all spoken when his own dear son
stood in the gateway.

The swineherd sprang up amazed,
and out of his hands fell the vessels he was busy with,
mixing the sparkling wine.

He went to meet his master,
and kissed his head, and both his beautiful eyes,
and both his hands;

and a warm tear fell from him.

And as a father, in the fullness of his heart, embraces his son
come from a far country in the tenth year,
an only son, late-born, for whom he has suffered many sorrows —
so then the noble swineherd took godlike Telemachus
in his arms and kissed him all over, as one escaped from death;

and sobbing he spoke winged words to him:

"You have come, Telemachus — sweet light!

I told myself
I would never see you again, once you had gone by ship to Pylos.

Come in now, come, dear child, so my heart may take
its joy of looking at you, newly here from elsewhere.

You do not often visit the farm and the herdsmen;

you stay in town:

so, it seems, it has pleased your heart —
to look on that deadly crowd of the suitor-men."
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him:

"So be it, old father.

It is for your sake I have come here,
to see you with my eyes, and to hear you tell me
whether my mother still remains in the halls, or by now
some other man has married her, and Odysseus' bed
lies empty of sleepers, holding only foul spider-webs."
Then the swineherd answered him, a leader of men:

"Indeed she remains, with an enduring heart,
in your own halls;

and always in misery
her nights and her days waste away in weeping."
So speaking, he took the bronze spear from him,
and Telemachus went in and crossed the stone threshold.

As he came on, his father Odysseus yielded his seat;

but Telemachus, from his side, checked him and said:

"Sit, stranger.

We will find a seat elsewhere
in our own farmstead.

Here is the man who will set one."
So he spoke;

and Odysseus went back and sat down.

And the swineherd
strewed green brushwood under, and a fleece on top,
and there the dear son of Odysseus seated himself.

And the swineherd set before them platters of roasted
meat, which they had left from their eating the day before,
and briskly heaped up bread in the baskets,
and mixed honey-sweet wine in an ivy-wood bowl,
and himself sat down opposite godlike Odysseus.

And their hands went out to the good things spread before them.

But when they had put away desire for food and drink,
then Telemachus spoke to the noble swineherd:

"Old father, where has this guest of yours come from?

How did sailors
bring him to Ithaca?

Who did they claim to be?

For I hardly think he came here on foot."
And you answered him, Eumaeus the swineherd:

"Then I will tell you, child, the whole truth of it.

He claims his birth from Crete of the wide dancing-grounds,
and says he has wandered rolling through many cities
of mortal men:

so a god has spun it for him.

Now, run off from a ship of Thesprotian men,
he has come to my farmstead;

and I put him in your hands.

Do as you will.

He declares himself your suppliant."
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him:

"Eumaeus, this word of yours cuts to the heart.

How am I to receive this guest in my house?