escape Athena, that Eumaeus the swineherd was gone from the farm:

she came near;

and in body she was like a woman
beautiful and tall, and skilled in glorious handwork.

She stood at the door of the hut, showing herself to Odysseus;

but Telemachus did not see her before him, did not sense her —
for the gods do not appear manifest to everyone —
but Odysseus saw her, and the dogs:

and they did not bark,
but whimpered and shrank in fear to the far side of the farmstead.

She signaled with her brows;

and noble Odysseus understood,
and came out of the hall, past the great wall of the yard,
and stood before her;

and Athena said to him:

"Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus of the many devices:

now speak your word to your son.

Hide it no longer —
so that you two may fit death and doom to the suitors
and go to the famous city.

And I myself
will not be long away from you:

I am hungry for battle."
She spoke, and Athena touched him with her golden wand.

First she laid a well-washed mantle and a tunic
about his chest, and filled out his frame and his youth:

dark color came back to his skin, his jaws grew full,
and the beard about his chin turned blue-black again.

That done, she went away again;

and Odysseus
went into the hut.

His dear son was struck with wonder,
and turned his eyes aside, afraid, in case it was a god,
and lifting his voice he spoke winged words to him:

"Stranger, you look other to me now than a moment ago:

you wear other clothes;

your skin is not the same.

Surely you are some god, one of those who hold wide heaven.

Be gracious, then!

— and we will give you pleasing sacrifices,
and wrought gifts of gold.

Only spare us."
Then much-enduring noble Odysseus answered him:

"I am no god.

Why do you liken me to the immortals?

No:

I am your father — for whose sake you go groaning
and suffer many pains, and take men's violence on yourself."
So speaking, he kissed his son, and down his cheeks
a tear fell to the ground.

Before, he had held them back, always.

But Telemachus — for he did not yet believe it was his father —
found words again, and said to him in answer:

"You are not Odysseus, not my father.

A god is casting
a spell on me, so I may sob and grieve still more.

No mortal man could ever contrive these things
by his own wit — not unless a god in person came
and made him young or old at a stroke, at will.

Just now, I know, you were old, and meanly dressed;

and now you are like the gods who hold wide heaven."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered him:

"Telemachus, it is not right, when your own father is here,
to marvel at him past measure, or stand amazed.

No other Odysseus will ever come to you here:

he is I — such as you see, having suffered, having wandered long —
come in the twentieth year to my father's land.

But this — this is the work of Athena, driver of the spoil,
who makes of me whatever she wills — for she has the power —
now like a beggar man, and now again
like a young man with fine clothes upon his body.

It is easy for the gods who hold wide heaven
to glorify a mortal man — or to break him."
So speaking he sat down;

and Telemachus,
flinging his arms around his noble father, wept and shed tears,
and in both of them rose the longing for lament.

They cried shrill, in bursts thicker than the cries of birds —
of ospreys, or of vultures with crooked talons, whose young
the country people have taken from the nest before they were fledged:

so pitifully the tears fell from beneath their brows.

And the light of the sun would have gone down on their weeping
had not Telemachus suddenly spoken to his father:

"What ship was it, dear father, whose sailors brought you
here to Ithaca?

Who did they claim to be?