So they spoke to each other of such things.

And meanwhile the well-built ship was putting in to Ithaca,
the ship that carried Telemachus from Pylos with all his companions.

When they had come inside the deep harbor,
they hauled the black ship up onto the land,
and high-spirited henchmen carried off their gear
and took the beautiful gifts straight to Clytius' house.

And they sent a herald ahead to the house of Odysseus
to bring the news to watchful-minded Penelope —
that Telemachus was in the country, and had ordered the ship
to sail on to the city — lest the strong queen
take fright at heart, and let the soft tear fall.

And the two of them met, the herald and the noble swineherd,
come on the same errand, to bring the woman word.

But when they reached the house of the godlike king,
the herald spoke out in the midst of the slave-women:

"Already, O queen, your dear son has come home."
But the swineherd stood close to Penelope and told her
everything her dear son had charged him to say.

And when he had delivered the whole of his commission,
he went his way to his swine, and left the walls and the hall.

But the suitors were downcast, dejected in spirit,
and came out of the hall past the great wall of the yard,
and there before the gates they sat themselves down.

And Eurymachus, Polybus' son, began to speak among them:

"Friends, here is a great work brought off insolently —
this voyage of Telemachus.

We swore it would never be done.

Come — let us drag down a black ship, the best we have,
and gather seamen for rowers, to carry word
quickly to those two out there:

come home at speed."
He had not finished speaking when Amphinomus, turning
in his place, saw the ship inside the deep harbor,
the crew furling the sail and holding the oars in their hands.

He broke into easy laughter and called to his companions:

"No need now to send any message.

They are in.

Either some god told them, or they saw the ship themselves
passing by — and could not catch her."
So he spoke;

and they rose and went to the shore of the sea.

Quickly the men hauled the black ship up onto the land,
and high-spirited henchmen carried off their gear;

and they themselves went in a body to the assembly-place, and allowed
no one else to sit among them, young or old.

And Antinous spoke among them, Eupeithes' son:

"Damn it all — see how the gods have slipped this man out of harm's reach!

Day after day our watchers sat on the windy headlands,
relief upon relief of them;

and with the sun gone down
we never passed a night ashore, but afloat on the sea
in our fast ship we waited for the bright Dawn,
lying in ambush for Telemachus, to take him
and kill him.

And all the while some god has brought him home.

Then let us here devise a wretched death
for Telemachus — not let him slip between our hands.

For I tell you,
while he lives, this business of ours will not be brought off.

He is shrewd himself now, in counsel and in mind,
and the people no longer look on us with any favor.

Act, then — before he can call the Achaeans together
to assembly.

He will not hang back, I promise you:

he will keep his anger;

he will stand up among them all and tell
how we wove sheer murder for him — and could not catch him.

And they will not praise us, hearing of evil deeds.

Beware they do not do us harm, and drive us
out of our own country, and we come to the land of strangers.

Take him first:

catch him in the field, far from the city,
or on the road.

His livelihood and goods we hold ourselves,
dividing them share and share among us;

the house
we would give his mother to keep — hers and the man who weds her.