but still I think on that unhappy man, in case he should come back
out of some place and scatter the suitors all through the household.”
Then resourceful Odysseus answered him, saying:

“Cowherd, since you resemble no wicked man and no fool here,
and I myself can perceive that good sense reaches your spirit,
therefore I will tell you a thing and swear a great oath upon it:

let Zeus now know first, highest of gods, and the guest-table here too,
and the hearth of noble Odysseus, to which I have come now,
that while you are still here, Odysseus will come to his homecoming.

With your own eyes you will see it, if that is indeed your desire there:

suitors being cut down, who here are the masters and rulers.”
Then the herdsman of cattle replied to him in his answer:

“If only, stranger, the son of Cronos would bring that word to fulfillment;

then you would know what strength there is in me and what hands follow.”
So in the same way Eumaeus also prayed to all the immortals
that wise Odysseus might come back home to his own house.

Thus they were speaking such things in turn to one another.

Meanwhile the suitors were shaping for Telemachus death-doom,
but to them on the left there came as a sign a great bird then,
an eagle high in flight, and he held in his talons a dove there.

Then among them Amphinomus rose in assembly and spoke thus:

“Friends, this design of ours will not be fulfilled to the ending,
this killing of Telemachus.

Come, let us think of the banquet.”
Thus spoke Amphinomus, and his counsel was pleasing among them.

Then they came to the house of Odysseus, godlike in spirit,
and they laid down their cloaks on the benches and chairs in the hall there.

Then they slaughtered great sheep and fattened goats for the feasting,
slaughtered as well sleek swine and a heifer brought from the herd there.

Then they roasted the innards and shared them about, and the wine then
mixed in the mixing-bowls;

and the swineherd handed the cups round.

Bread for them Philoetius dealt, the leader of oxherds,
set in beautiful baskets, and Melanthius poured the wine there.

Then to the good fare ready and spread before them they reached out.

But Telemachus, turning his mind to guile, seated Odysseus
there in the well-built hall, by the side of the threshold of stonework,
placing a shabby stool beneath him and there a small table.

By him he set portions of innards and poured out the wine then
into a golden cup, and he spoke and addressed him in words thus:

“Here now sit among men and drink your wine in their company.

I myself will hold off from you all taunts and all violence,
all from the suitors, since this house is not common to all men,
but Odysseus’ house, and for me that man won and acquired it.

And you suitors, keep back your spirit from insults and handblows,
lest some quarrel arise and a fight be stirred in the hall here.”
Thus he spoke, and they all bit hard with their teeth on their lip-edges,
marveling at Telemachus, how he had spoken so boldly.

Then among them Antinous spoke, the son of Eupeithes:

“Though it is hard, Achaeans, let us accept what is spoken,
Telemachus’ word;

for with force and with threats he addresses us.

Zeus son of Cronos would not allow it;

else long before now we
would have stopped him inside these halls, though he is a clear speaker.”
Thus spoke Antinous;

but he paid no heed to his speaking.

Through the town then the heralds were leading the holy hecatomb,
and the long-haired Achaeans assembled together in thronging
under the shady grove of Apollo who strikes from afar there.

Then when they had roasted the outer flesh and drawn it away there,
sharing the portions out, they feasted on the splendid banquet.