When sleep now seized him, releasing the cares that troubled his spirit,
loosening his limbs, then his wife awoke, wise in her inward heart's knowledge,
and upon her soft bed she sat up and there she was weeping.

But when with weeping she had had her fill and had eased her own spirit,
first to Artemis then did the woman most noble of women make prayer:

“Artemis, queenly goddess, O daughter of Zeus, would that even
now you would plant in my breast your shaft and would take away spirit,
this very moment, or else let a stormwind seize and uplift me,
carrying me away down the darkened paths that are mistily hidden,
and cast me forth where the backward-flowing Ocean pours out from his waters.

Even as when the daughters of Pandareus once were taken by stormwinds:

for the gods destroyed their parents, and they were abandoned there orphaned
in the halls, and divine Aphrodite took thought for their rearing
with rich cheese and with honey so sweet and with wine that was pleasant.

Hera bestowed upon them beyond all women in measure
beauty and prudent good sense, and holy Artemis stature,
and Athena instructed their hands in the making of glorious handiwork.

But when divine Aphrodite had gone to the heights of Olympus,
asking for these young girls the fulfillment of blossoming marriage,
to Zeus who delights in the thunder, for he indeed knows all things,
both the portion and lack of portion of mortal men who are earthbound,
then in the meantime the storm-snatching Harpies swept off those maidens
and delivered them over to hateful Erinyes for service.

So may the Olympian dwellers blot me also away and make me vanish,
or may fair-tressed Artemis strike me, so that with Odysseus
seeing him, I might even go down under the hateful earth there,
and never again bring joy to the mind of an inferior man.

Yet even that evil can still be endured, whenever a person
weeps through the days, with the heart in its inmost places afflicted,
if in the nights sleep holds him;

for sleep makes forgetting of all things,
good things alike and bad, when it has veiled over the eyelids;

but upon me the spirit drove even evil dreams in their swiftness.

For in this very night there slept beside me one like to himself,
such as he was when he went with the host;

and my own heart within me
rejoiced, since I thought it was not a dream, but waking already.”
So she spoke, and at once came Dawn on her golden high throne there.

Then noble Odysseus took note of the sound of her weeping;

afterward in his heart he pondered, and this seemed likely within him,
that she, knowing him now, had come and stood close over his head there.

He gathered the cloak and the fleeces in which he had taken his sleeping,
set them within the hall on a chair, and the oxhide beside them
carried outdoors and laid it away;

then, raising his hands, prayed to Zeus:

“Father Zeus, if in truth you gods in your will have conveyed me
over the dry land home and the wet, though you battered me sorely,
let some word be spoken to me by one of the folk here awakening
from within, and outside let another sign out of Zeus be made manifest.”
So he spoke in prayer, and Zeus of the counsels heard what he asked for.

Straightway he thundered aloud from radiant heights of Olympus,
high from the clouds;

and noble Odysseus rejoiced at the portent.

Then from the house there came an omen-word from a woman at grinding,
near where the mills of the shepherd of people were ranged for his household.

There were twelve women in all who labored there at them always,
making barley meal and fine wheat flour, the marrow of mortals.

All the others indeed were asleep, since they had ground out their portion;

only one had not yet ceased, and she was by far the most feeble.