She then stopped her millstone and spoke a word, a sign for her master:

“Father Zeus, who are lord over gods and over mankind all,
loudly indeed you have thundered from out of the star-besprinkled heaven,
though there is no cloud anywhere;

to someone you show this as wonder.

Bring now to fulfillment for me as well, poor wretch, this saying:

may the suitors upon this day, for the last and uttermost occasion,
take in the halls of Odysseus their welcome meal of feasting,
they who by painful labor that wears at the heart have unstrung my knees
while I prepare them their barley meal;

now may they dine for the last time.”
So she spoke, and noble Odysseus rejoiced in the spoken omen,
and in the thunder of Zeus;

for he said in his heart they would pay for their outrage.

Then the other serving women through noble house of Odysseus,
gathered together, kindled the tireless fire on the hearthstone.

Out from his bed uprose Telemachus, like to an immortal,
put on his clothes, and about his shoulder he slung his sharp sword there;

under his gleaming feet he bound his beautiful sandals,
took up a mighty spear with its point made keen by sharp bronze there,
stood as he went on the threshold, and spoke then to Eurycleia:

“Dear nurse, did you honor the stranger here in the house as was fitting,
with a bed and with food, or does he lie there uncared for wholly?

Such is the way of my mother, though wise in her thought she may be still:

at random she honors another of mortal men, though the worse man,
but a better man she sends away with dishonor upon him.”
Then to him in reply spoke prudent and watchful Eurycleia:

“Child, do not now accuse the guiltless woman without a cause there.

Truly he sat and drank of the wine for as long as he wished it himself,
and of food he said he no longer had hunger;

she asked him about it.

But when now he began to bethink him of rest and of slumber,
she told the serving women to spread him a bed for his sleeping;

but he, like some man altogether unhappy and struck by misfortune,
would not consent to sleep on a bedstead and under the blankets,
but on an untanned oxhide and fleeces shorn from the sheepfold
slept in the forehall;

and we ourselves cast a cloak over him.”
So she spoke, and Telemachus passed straight out through the great hall,
holding his spear, and along with him followed two swift dogs together.

He went on his way to the place of assembly among the Achaeans.

Then again to the serving women that godlike lady of women,
Eurycleia, daughter of Ops, son of Peisenor, called out:

“Come now, some of you sweep through the hall and put all things in order,
sprinkle it down, and on the well-fashioned chairs spread purple coverlets;

others with sponges wipe down all of the tables around them,
and cleanse the mixing bowls and the carefully wrought two-handled goblets;

others of you go after water and hasten away to the fountain,
and bring it back with speed;

for not much longer away from the hall here
will the suitors remain, but early indeed they will gather,
since for all people alike this day is a day of festival.”
So she spoke, and they listened intently and did as she bade them.

Twenty of them went off to the spring with its dark-flowing water,
while the others within the house worked busily, knowing their business.

Then came in the attendants of the Achaeans;

these men in the meantime
They split the firewood well and with an accomplished neatness;

then from the spring the women came back, and behind them the swineherd
came driving three fat hogs, which were the best of them all there.

These he let graze through the beautiful pens and enclosures,
then in his turn addressed Odysseus with gentle words, saying: