“No, by Zeus, Agelaus, and by the griefs of my father,
who somewhere far from Ithaca either is dead or is wandering,
I am not delaying my mother's marriage;

indeed I exhort her
to wed whomsoever she will, and I will give countless gifts too.

But I am ashamed to send her away from the hall against her will there
by a compelling word;

may a god never bring this to pass for me.”
So spoke Telemachus.

Then Pallas Athena among them
stirred in the suitors unquenchable laughter and warped their perceptions.

They by now with jaws that were no longer their own fell to laughing,
and they were eating flesh that was smeared all over with blood there;

and their eyes were filled up with tears, and their hearts sensed a wailing.

Then among them spoke godlike Theoclymenus, saying:

“Ah, wretched men, what evil is this that you suffer among you?

Night has wrapped round your heads and faces and down to your knees too.

Wailing bursts into flame, and the cheeks are all drenched with weeping;

walls are bespattered with blood, and the beautiful beams in the house there.

The forecourt is full of phantoms, the courtyard also is crowded,
streaming down into Erebus under the gloom and the darkness;

out of the sky the sun has perished, and evil mist spreads on us.”
So he spoke, and they all at him broke into sweet laughing.

Then Eurymachus, Polybus' son, began speaking among them:

“The stranger is mad, this fellow newly arrived from elsewhere.

Come, young men, quickly now, escort him out of the doorway
to the assembly place, since these things seem to him like night here.”
Then in reply to him spoke godlike Theoclymenus:

“Eurymachus, I do not ask that you furnish escorts for me.

I have eyes of my own and ears and both of my feet here,
and within my breast a mind well-fashioned and nothing unworthy.

Trusting in these, I shall go out of doors, since I see evil
coming on all of you, an evil that no one among you
of the suitors can flee from or ever avoid in the household
of godlike Odysseus, while you outrage men and plot folly.”
Having spoken, he went from the well-inhabited dwelling,
and he came to Peiraeus, who welcomed him gladly before him.

Then the suitors all, glancing each one toward one another,
baited Telemachus now, with laughter directed at strangers.

Thus would a man among those overbearing young suitors be saying:

“Telemachus, no man has guests more troublesome than yours are.

See what a fellow is here, this importunate wandering beggar,
wanting bread and wine, yet knowing nothing of labor
and nothing of strength, but merely a burden of earth here.

Then this other man too stood up to play at the prophet.

But if you would listen to me, this would be far more profitable:

let us put these guests aboard a ship with many row-benches
and send them off to Sicily, where they would fetch you good payment.”
Thus the suitors were speaking, but he took no heed of their sayings;

silently he kept gazing at his father, waiting forever
till at last he would set his hands on the shameless suitors.

Meanwhile she, in the facing place, had set down her beautiful chair there,
Icarius' daughter, the circumspect Penelope, sitting,
and she heard in the hall the speech of each one of the men there.

For they had prepared their dinner with laughter and with loud mockery,
sweet to the taste and abundant, since they had slaughtered so many.

Yet there could never have been any supper more joyless than that one,
such as a goddess and a mighty man soon were about to
set before them;

for first they themselves had devised what was shameful.