“Stranger, do the Achaeans regard you a little more kindly,
or do they still disgrace you all through the halls, as before now?”
Then resourceful Odysseus answered him, saying:

“If only, Eumaeus, the gods might repay them that outrage,
all that these men in their insolence plot and keep plotting,
here in another man's house;

they possess not a portion of shame.”
So they were speaking such things to each other in turn there;

then Melanthius came near to them, the goatherd of goats there,
driving the goats that surpassed all the rest of the goat-herds,
as a meal for the suitors;

and two herdsmen went with him.

These he tied up beneath the loud-echoing porch of the courtyard,
then in his turn addressed Odysseus with mocking words, saying:

“Stranger, are you still here in the house and still pestering people,
begging from men?

Will you not yet go outside through the doorway?

Surely I do not think that the two of us now will be parted
before we have tasted our fists, since you beg with no order.

There are also other feasts among the Achaeans elsewhere.”
So he spoke, but resourceful Odysseus answered him nothing;

silently only he shook his head, while he pondered deep evil.

Then there came as the third one Philoetius, leader of men there,
driving a barren cow for the suitors, and fat goats beside her.

Ferrymen brought them across, the same men who also convey there
all other travelers too, any man who arrives there among them.

These he tied up well beneath the loud-echoing porch of the courtyard,
then standing close by the swineherd he asked him a question:

“Swineherd, who is this stranger that newly has come to our household?

What men does he declare are his own?

From what people is he?

Where then are his lineage and the land of his fathers?

Luckless man, and yet in his build he resembles a ruler.

But the gods bring low the much-wandering race of men always,
whenever they spin out affliction and sorrow, even for kingship.”
So he spoke, and he stood by and clasped his right hand in greeting,
and calling to him he addressed him in winged words, saying:

“Health to you, father and stranger.

May great prosperity later
yet become yours;

but now you are held in abundant afflictions.

Father Zeus, there is no god other than you more destructive;

you have no pity on men, though you yourself have begotten them,
joining them up with misery and with grievous sorrows.

As I looked on him, sweat came over me, and my eyes filled with weeping,
calling Odysseus to mind, since I think that he also is wearing
rags such as these, and wanders among mankind somewhere,
if indeed he still lives and still looks on the light of the sunlight.

But if he has died already and dwells in the house of Hades,
then alas for noble Odysseus, who set me over the cattle
when I was still but a little boy in the land of Cephallenians.

Now they increase past number, and no man otherwise ever
could have so rich a breed of broad-browed cattle springing like cornfields.

Yet others command me to drive them along for themselves to consume them;

nothing at all do they care for the son in the halls of the household,
neither do they fear the revenge of the gods, for already
they are eager to portion the goods of the lord long absent.

But in my own breast this thought in my heart whirls ever around me:

it is indeed a terrible thing, while his son still is living,
going away with the cattle to visit the land of another,
passing to foreign men;

but more chilling still is it, staying
here to endure the grief while one sits by cattle not one's own now.

Long since I would have gone and fled to some other great monarch,
since these things are no longer at all to be borne or endured here;