But in the forecourt there lay down noble Odysseus for sleeping.

Under him first he spread a raw hide stripped from an ox for bedding,
and above it many the fleeces of sheep that Achaeans had slaughtered.

Then Eurynome cast a cloak over him there as he slumbered.

There lay Odysseus awake, in his spirit devising destruction
for the suitors;

and out from the hall came forth all the women,
those who before had consorted and lain with the suitors continually,
giving each other bright laughter and sharing delight in each other.

Then in the breast that was his his spirit was stirred into tumult;

much did he ponder in mind and in heart as he turned it all over,
whether to rush upon them and bring death down upon every woman,
or to allow them once more with the suitors so proud to be mingling,
for the last and the uttermost time;

and his heart within him was barking.

As when a bitch by her helpless whelps is standing and guarding
barks at a man she does not know and is eager to fight him,
so did his heart bark within him, enraged at the evil before him.

But he struck on his breast and rebuked his heart with a saying:

“Bear up now, heart.

You endured a thing more shameless than this one
on that day when the Cyclops with ravenous strength beyond bearing
ate my powerful comrades;

yet you endured, till your cunning
led you out from the cave, though you thought you were doomed there to perish.”
So he spoke, as there in his breast he upbraided his own dear heart there;

and his heart in obedience stood enduring and patient
ceaselessly;

but he himself kept turning from this side to that side.

As when a man by a great fire blazing in strength and in brightness
turns a paunch full-packed with fat and with blood from one side to another,
shifting it here and there, and desires it be roasted the quicker,
so did he turn from one side to another, pondering inwardly
how he might lay hands at last on the suitors, the shameless offenders,
one man alone against many.

Then Athena came close beside him,
down from the sky descending, and in form she resembled a woman.

Then she stood overhead by his head and addressed him in speech there:

“Why are you wakeful again, most wretched by far of all mortals?

This is indeed your house, and here in the house is your own wife,
and your child, such a son as a man in his prayers would desire for.”
Then resourceful Odysseus addressed her again in reply thus:

“Yes indeed, goddess, in all that you said you have spoken with justice.

But this is the thing my spirit keeps turning and weighing within me:

how I shall lay my hands on the suitors, the shameless offenders,
being alone by myself;

and they are forever assembled within there.

And besides, yet another and greater concern I keep pondering:

if by the will of Zeus and by yours I should kill them and conquer,
where could I flee to escape?

This is what I command you to consider.”
Then again the gray-eyed goddess Athena addressed him:

“Stubborn man, and yet one may trust in a companion far weaker,
one who is mortal indeed and does not know counsels so many.

But I am a god, and through all things continually I guard you
in every labor.

And now I will tell you the matter out plainly.

Even if fifty companies of men who eat bread all around us
stood there to hem us in, with desire to destroy us in Ares,
still from them you would drive off cattle and sturdy fat sheep there.

No, let sleep now take hold upon you;

for wretched it is to be watching
all through the night without rest, and from evils you soon will emerge now.”
So she spoke, and upon his eyelids she poured down sweet slumber,
and then the bright goddess of goddesses went back to Olympus.