“Easily spoken the word I will tell you and set in your thinking:

whomever among the people departed you willingly suffer
near to the blood, that spirit will tell you the truth in its fullness;

whomever you will not allow, that spirit will turn and depart you.”
Thus having spoken, the spirit of lord Tiresias departed,
into the house of Hades, when all of the fates were revealed there.

Yet I remained where I stood until my mother approached me,
drinking the dark-clouded blood, and at once she knew me and addressed me;

wailing aloud, she spoke, and these words took wing as she uttered:

“Child, how did you come living beneath the shadowy darkness?

Hard is the vision of all these things for the people still living;

terrible waters and powerful rivers are lying between us,
Ocean first, which no person on foot has the power to cross over,
never, unless in possession of one well-constructed black vessel.

Have you but now come wandering here from the country of Trojans,
after so long a time, with your ship and the faithful companions?

Have you not come to Ithaca yet, nor seen your wife in the palace?”
Thus did she speak, and I answered my mother and said in response then:

“Mother, necessity brought me below to the house of the death-god,
there to inquire of the spirit of Theban Tiresias, prophet.

I have not yet gone near to Achaea, nor have I ever
set foot again on the land that is ours, but wander in sorrow
since that first day I followed the noble lord Agamemnon,
marching to Ilium, land of fine horses, to battle the Trojans.

Come now, tell me this other, and speak with the truth as I ask you:

what kind of death that lays humankind low overwhelmed and subdued you?

Was it prolonged disease?

Did Artemis, lady of arrows,
come with the gentle shafts of her bow and destroy you beside them?

Tell me as well of my father and son whom I left in the palace:

whether my honor is safe in their keeping, or whether another
man now possesses it all, and they say I will never be homeward.

Tell me the mind and the purpose as well of the wife I have wedded:

does she remain by the boy and keep everything safe in the household,
or has the best of Achaeans already taken and wed her?”
Thus did I speak, and at once my honored mother responded:

“Yes, she remains in your halls with a heart that is steadfast and patient;

there she abides in the palace, and always in misery grievous
nights are consumed from her life, and the days are dissolved in her weeping.

No man yet has taken possession of your royal honor;

still unopposed, Telemachus tends to the fields and is feasting
there at the equal banquets that suit an administrator of justice,
since every man calls him forth.

But your father remains in the country,
never descending to town, and possesses no bed for his sleeping,
neither a bedframe nor cloaks nor the brilliant blankets to cover him.

All through the winter he sleeps where the slaves in the household are sleeping,
close to the fire in the ashes, and dresses his body in rags there;

but when the summer arrives and the generous autumn is ripening,
then on the rising ground of his vineyard, wherever he chooses,
beds of the fallen leaves are scattered along on the earth there.

There he lies grieving, and sorrow grows great in the heart that is in him,
yearning for your homecoming, while harsh old age bears upon him.

So it was likewise with me:

so I perished and met my destruction.

Neither within the palace did keen-eyed Artemis find me,
pouring her gentle arrows upon me and taking my life there,
nor did disease come upon me, the kind which commonly wears down
limbs with its hateful wasting and draws from the body its spirit.

No;