it was longing for you, for your counsels, O shining Odysseus,
and for your tenderheartedness, robbing me of honey-sweet lifebreath.”
Thus did she speak;

and I, pondering deeply, was eager within me
there to embrace the spirit of my dead mother and hold her.

Three times I started toward her, and three times the heart bade me clasp her;

three times away from my hands like a shadow or dream she went flying.

Sharper each time did the pain in my own heart gather within me;

raising my voice, I addressed her, and these words took wing as I uttered:

“Mother, why will you not remain when I yearn to embrace you,
so that, even in Hades, our arms may be thrown round each other,
both of us taking our fill of the terrible chill of lamenting?

Or are you only a phantom that queen Persephone sent me,
so I may suffer yet more in my pitiful groaning and weeping?”
Thus did I speak, and at once my honored mother responded:

“Ah, my child, most luckless of all humankind in your sorrow,
Zeus’s daughter Persephone does not deceive you in any way.

This is the settled condition of mortals whenever they perish:

sinews no longer are holding together the flesh and the bone-frame;

these are destroyed by the fierce and powerful strength of the blazing
fire, when life has departed away from the white bones within them;

then like a dream the spirit flies free and is hovering onward.

Hasten toward light, however, as quickly as ever you can now;

mark these things, so you may hereafter report them all to your wife there.”
So the two of us stayed exchanging our words with each other.

Then came the women—for queen Persephone sent them before me—
all who had once been the wives and the daughters of excellent heroes.

Flocking in multitudes there, they surrounded the dark-colored life-blood;

I in my mind was considering how I could question each woman.

This, as I thought it all over, appeared to my mind as the best plan:

drawing the long-edged sword that hung from beside my strong thigh there,
I did not suffer them all at one time to drink the black life-blood.

One after one they approached in a file, and each woman recounted
all of her birth and her lineage;

I questioned every one of them.