Then after him I distinguished the powerful Heracles—only
phantom of him, for the man with the deathless immortals is feasting,
filled with delight, and possesses as wife fair-ankled Hebe,
daughter of Zeus the almighty and Hera of gold-glimmering sandals.
Round the phantom the cries of the dead men arose like the cries of
birds as they scatter in terror; like black night he stood there before them,
holding his naked bow in his hand, with the arrow on bowstring,
terribly glaring about like a man who was always about to be shooting.
Dreadful to see was the baldric that crossed the great breadth of his chest there,
belt for the sword made of gold, where marvelous works were depicted:
bears and the wild forest boars and the lions with fire in their eyesight,
battles and combats and violent murders and slaughter of heroes.
May he who put such designs in the belt never fashion another,
he who conceived in his craft and accomplished a wonderful object.
He in his turn recognized me as soon as his eyes fell upon me;
wailing aloud, he spoke, and these words took wing as he uttered:
“Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus endlessly resourceful,
luckless one, are you also enduring the terrible fortune
I had to bear underneath the illuminating rays of the sunlight?
Though I was Zeus’s own son and descended from Cronus, my troubles
never were ended; I served under one who was far my inferior,
and on my shoulders the man laid labors of terrible hardship.
Once he commanded me here to recover the Hound of the death-god,
reckoning no other trial could ever be stronger than this one.
Yet I dragged up the Hound and conveyed him outside of the death-world;
Hermes accompanied me, and Athena, the gray-eyed goddess.”
Thus having spoken, he went to the house of the god Hades once more.
Yet I remained where I stood in the hope some other would come there,
one of the hero men who had died in the generations before us.
Then I would surely have seen the men of the old age I longed for,
Theseus and Pirithous, illustrious children of godhood;
but the innumerable tribes of the dead first gathered around me,
thousands on thousands, with cries no earthly thing could resemble;
pale fear seized me lest queen Persephone send out of Hades
toward me the terrible Gorgon’s head, that monstrous abomination.
Straight to the ship I went and commanded the faithful companions
all to embark and release every cable that fastened the stern there.
Swiftly they came on the ship and sat down by the tholes of the oarlocks;
then did the current’s billow convey her along Ocean’s river,
first under rowing, and afterward borne by a beautiful fair wind.