There as the first among women I saw highborn lady Tyro,
saying that she was the child of the blameless ruler Salmoneus,
also the wife of Cretheus, the son of the lordly Aeolus.
She fell in love with a river, Enipeus’ beautiful god-stream,
far and away the most beautiful river that runs on the earth-land;
often she walked by Enipeus’ beautiful waters and wandered.
Then lord Poseidon, the earth-holding shaker, assuming the river’s
likeness, lay down there beside her at mouths of the eddying water.
Darkly a wave like a mountain arose and surrounded them, arching
over them both, and it hid the immortal and mortal woman.
There he unfastened her maidenly girdle and poured sleep upon her.
After the god had completed the works of desire and of loving,
taking her hand in his own, he addressed her and called her by title:
“Woman, rejoice in our loving; when this same season returns here,
you will give birth to illustrious children; the bed of immortals
never is fruitless. Attend to your children and carefully rear them.
Go to your home now, remain in your silence, and utter no god’s name;
know I am lord Poseidon, the powerful shaker of earth-land.”
Thus having spoken, he plunged underneath the wave-surging sea-depths.
She, having then conceived, gave birth to both Pelias, Neleus,
each of whom grew into powerful servants of Zeus the almighty.
Pelias dwelt in Iolcus, the wide-dancing city, with rich flocks;
Neleus meanwhile inhabited Pylos, the city of sand-dunes.
Other sons this queen among women gave Cretheus as children:
Aeson, Amythaon, skilled with the chariot, Pheres.
Next I beheld Antiope, the daughter of river Asopus,
proud to have rested in love in the very embraces of great Zeus;
she gave birth to twin sons, Amphion and lordly Zethus,
first to establish the site of the seven-gated city of Thebes there,
walling it round, for without such a wall they could not have settled,
powerful though they were, in the broad-dancing spaces of Thebes there.
Next I beheld Amphitryon’s beautiful wife, lady Alcmene,
mother of lionhearted Heracles, bold in the battle,
born when she rested in love in the mighty embraces of great Zeus;
also Megara, high-spirited Creon’s beautiful daughter,
wife of Amphitryon’s son, whose strength was eternally tireless.

Then I beheld Epicaste, the beautiful mother of Oedipus,
she who accomplished a terrible deed in her mind’s unawareness,
wedding her son, after he had taken the life of his father;
soon the immortals made these things known to the people around them.
Yet in beloved Thebes he continued to rule the Cadmeians,
suffering anguish because of the gods’ destruction-appointed
counsels; but she went down into Hades’ strongly barred palace,
fastening high on the roof beam a noose that would hang her in midair,
seized by her sorrow, and leaving her son those torments unnumbered,
all that the Furies belonging to mothers are bringing to fullness.