First came the spirit of my companion Elpenor to meet me,
since he had not been buried beneath wide earth in a grave mound.
There in the palace of Circe we left his body behind us,
neither lamented nor buried, because other labor compelled us.
Seeing him there, I wept, and my heart took pity upon him;
raising my voice, I addressed him, and these words took wing as I uttered:
“Tell me, Elpenor, how you arrived in the shadowy darkness.
Coming on foot, you outstripped me although I was borne in a black ship.”
Thus did I speak, and he groaned with a wail and responded in answer:
“Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus endlessly resourceful,
evil fate from a god and immeasurable wine were my ruin.
Lying asleep in the palace of Circe, I did not remember
how to return by descending again on the long-built ladder;
headlong I fell from the roof, and the bones of my neck were completely
snapped from the spine, and my spirit descended to Hades’ dominion.
Now by those who remain and are absent from us, I beseech you:
first by your wife, then your father, the man who attended your childhood,
then by Telemachus, left as your only child in the palace.
Well do I know that on going from here and the house of the death-god,
you will return in your well-made vessel to Aeaea’s island.
There, O lord, I command you to call to remembrance my sorrow.
Do not depart and abandon me there unlamented, unburied,
turning away, lest I bring down the wrath of the gods upon you.
Burn me together with all of the armor that still is my own there;
pile up a tomb on the shore of the gray and unharvested sea-brine,
marking a luckless man, so the people to come may remember.
Do this for me, and upon the grave mound plant the oar that I handled,
rowing while I was alive in the midst of my faithful companions.”
Thus did he speak, and I answered the spirit and said in response then:
“Luckless man, I will carry out all these things and fulfill them.”
So we sat there, one answering one with sorrowful language,
I on this side of the trench while holding my sword by the blood-pool,
while on the other the phantom of my dead comrade continued.

Then came the spirit of my mother, already departed,
lord Autolycus’ daughter Anticleia, born to the great-heart,
whom I had left still living when going to sacred Ilium.
Seeing her there, I wept, and my heart took pity upon her;
yet, though mourning her bitterly, I did not allow her to come there
near to the blood until I had questioned Tiresias fully.