Then I saw Chloris, a woman of beauty beyond every telling,
whom lord Neleus married for beauty with gifts beyond counting,
youngest of daughters descended from Iasus’ son lord Amphion,
who once ruled in his strength in Minyan Orchomenus’ city.
She was the queen of Pylos and bore him illustrious children:
Nestor and Chromius, also the lordly prince Periclymenus;
after the sons she bore mighty Pero, a marvel to mortals,
courted by every man in the neighboring lands; but her father
would not give her to any man unable to steal from the country
mighty Iphicles’ broad-browed cattle with horns that were curving,
out of Phylace, dangerous herd. The blameless prophet
only attempted the deed, but the merciless fate of a god bound
him in cruel bonds, and the brutal herdsmen detained him.
But when the months and the days at last had approached their completion,
after the year turned round and the seasons again had returned there,
mighty Iphicles finally freed him from bonds in the prison,
after he told every fate; and Zeus’s will was accomplished.

Then I beheld queen Leda, the wife of the lord Tyndareus,
she who bore two sons to Tyndareus, powerful-hearted:
horse-breaking Castor, and Polydeuces, excellent boxer.
Both are embraced by the life-giving earth, yet both are still living;
even beneath the earth they have honor from Zeus the almighty,
living in turn every other day and then dying in turn there,
each on his separate day; they possess equal honor with godhood.

Next I beheld Iphimedeia, the wife of lord Aloeus,
she who declared she had lain in the arms of the god Poseidon.
Two sons she bore—but their days in the world of the living were brief ones—
godlike Otus and Ephialtes, renowned among all men,
tallest by far of the mortals the grain-giving earth ever nurtured,
also the fairest in form with the sole exception Orion.
Nine years old, they measured nine cubits across in their broadness,
also in height their bodies extended to nine mighty fathoms.
Even the gods they threatened, proposing to carry the tumult
of furious war to Olympus, the home of the deathless immortals.
Ossa they labored to set on Olympus, then leafy and forested
Pelion high upon Ossa, that heaven might be made accessible.
This they would surely have done if they came to the measure of manhood;
but the great son of Zeus whom Leto of beautiful hair bore
slew them both, before on the sides of their heads the first down bloomed,
growing to thicken their chins with the flourishing beard of the young man.