When Persephone, holy and queenly, had driven the spirits
this way and that of the women who died and had gone to the death-world,
there came the soul of the lord Agamemnon, the son born of Atreus,
grieving;

and round him the spirits were gathered of all those companions
slaughtered with him in Aegisthus’ palace and meeting their death there.

At once he knew me after he drank of the dark-colored life-blood;

shrilly he wept with a cry, and the great tears fell from his eyelids,
stretching his hands in his longing to reach me and take me and hold me.

Yet there was neither the strength still fixed in the limbs nor the sinewy
force which had filled his supple and powerful body in old days.

Seeing him there, I wept, and my heart took pity upon him;

raising my voice, I addressed him, and these words took wing as I uttered:

“Atreus’ son Agamemnon, O most renowned king of armies,
what kind of death that lays humankind low overwhelmed and subdued you?

Did lord Poseidon overcome you aboard the black vessels,
raising a terrible blast of the ruinous winds in his anger?

Or did malicious men cut you down on the dry land while you were
stealing their cattle and beautiful sheep, or perhaps while you battled
over their city and all of the women inhabiting in it?”
Thus did I speak, and at once his spirit responded in answer:

“Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus endlessly resourceful,
lord Poseidon did not overcome me aboard the black vessels,
raising a terrible blast of the ruinous winds in his anger;

nor did malicious men cut me down on the dry land and slaughter me.

No:

my death and my doom were devised by the treacherous lord Aegisthus,
aided by my accursed wife, when he called me inside and then killed me,
feasting me first, as a man at the manger will slaughter an ox there.

Thus I died by the most pitiable death, and around me the others,
all my companions, were ceaselessly slaughtered like white-tusked swine there,
cut down inside of the house of a wealthy and powerful ruler,
whether to furnish a wedding, a feast, or a generous banquet.

You have been present before at the violent deaths of great numbers,
slaughtered alone or together within the ferocity of battle;

yet you would certainly grieve in your heart above all at that one sight,
seeing how there by the wine bowl and tables abundantly loaded
all of us lay in the hall, while the floor smoked upward with life-blood.

Most to be pitied of all was the voice I heard of Cassandra,
Priam’s daughter, whom treacherous Clytemnestra then murdered
over my body;

and dying, I tried to lift up both my hands there,
striking them down on the sword, while that dog-faced woman withdrew then.

Nor, though I went into Hades, did she have the heart to turn toward me,
closing my mouth with her hands or shutting my eyes for the death-world.

Nothing is truly more dreadful or shamelessly doglike than woman
when she establishes such atrocious deeds in her thinking,
just as the woman designed this deed that cannot be spoken,
plotting the death and destruction of him who had married and loved her.

I had supposed I would come to the joy of my children and servants;

she, however, the mistress of outrage, has poured a dishonor
over her own head and that of all women who ever come after,
all of the feminine sex, and even the woman of virtue.”
Thus did he speak, and I answered the spirit and said in response then:

“Ah, how terribly Zeus of the far voice hated and harried
Atreus’ line from the first, through the treacherous planning of women.

We for the sake of Helen were dying in thousands at Troas;

Clytemnestra for you, while you were far off, spread out the death-snare.”
Thus did I speak, and at once his spirit responded in answer: