Then came the spirit of Theban Tiresias, prophet and seer-man,
holding a golden scepter;

he knew who I was and addressed me:

“Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus endlessly resourceful,
why, unhappy one, have you left behind you the brightness of sunlight,
coming to look on the dead and this place where delight cannot enter?

Draw yourself back from the trench and withdraw your sharp sword from over it,
so I may drink of the blood and reveal you the certain prediction.”
Thus did he speak;

I withdrew and I thrust the silver-embellished
sword in its sheath once again.

When the prophet had drunk the black life-blood,
only then did the blameless seer turn toward me and answer:

“Honey-sweet homeward return is your wish, O shining Odysseus,
but an immortal will render it grievous.

I do not imagine
earth-shaking lord Poseidon will fail to remember;

the anger
planted within him endures, for you blinded the son he held dearest.

Even through hardships and sorrow, however, you still may return home,
if you are willing to master your own heart and those of your comrades,
from the first hour when your well-made vessel approaches the island
called Thrinacia, after escaping the violet sea-depths.

There you will find at their pasture the cattle and sturdy sheep-flocks
sacred to Helios, lord who sees all things and hears every utterance.

If you leave these all unharmed and remember your difficult homeward
journey, you still may arrive upon Ithaca, suffering greatly.

But if you harm them, I prophesy utter destruction
both for your ship and companions;

and even if you should escape it,
late will you come and in evil condition, with all comrades lost there,
borne in another man’s vessel, and finding affliction at home there:

arrogant men who are eating away all the wealth of your household,
courting your godlike wife and bestowing their gifts for the bridal.

Surely, when home, you will punish the violent acts they committed.

After you slaughter the suitors within the halls of your palace,
whether by cunning or openly striking with sharp-edged bronze there,
then undertake one more journey, a well-shaped oar on your shoulder,
till you arrive among people who have no knowledge of sea-brine,
people who never eat food with the salt of the sea intermixed there,
having no knowledge of crimson-cheeked ships that travel the sea-roads,
nor of the well-shaped oars that serve as the wings of the vessels.

I will reveal you a sign unmistakable;

you will not miss it.

When another traveler meets you abroad on the road there,
saying you carry a winnowing fan on your glittering shoulder,
then in the earth at that place you must fix the well-fashioned oar-blade,
offering beautiful victims to lord Poseidon, the sea-god:

sacrifice one ram there with a bull and a boar that mounts she-swine.

Then turn away toward your home and present to the gods their appointed
sacred hecatombs, to the deathless gods of the wide-ruling heavens,
every immortal in order.

Your death will arrive from the seaward,
death without violence, peaceful, and take you away in the ripeness
under a sleek old age, with the people around you in plenty.

These words I speak are the truth, and the course of events will confirm them.”
Thus did he speak, and I answered the prophet and said in response then:

“Lord Tiresias, surely the gods spun all of this future.

Come now, tell me this other, and speak with the truth as I ask you.

There I behold the spirit of my dead mother beside us,
sitting in silence close to the blood, and she does not venture
either to look in the face of her son or address him with language.

Tell me, lord, by what means may she know I am truly her own son?”
Thus did I speak, and at once the spirit responded in answer: