When we went down in the wooden horse that Epeius fashioned,
we who were best of the Argives, and all the command was upon me,
either to open the close-packed ambush or shut and restrain it,
then all the other leaders and counselors serving the Danaans
wiped the tears from their eyes, and the limbs under each man were trembling;

never once did my eyes then see your son’s beautiful color
pale in his skin, nor see him wipe tears from his eyelids in terror.

No;

he entreated me over and over again, and he never
ceased from his hand on the hilt of the sword and the bronze-heavy spear-shaft,
carrying evil intent for the Trojans within him throughout it.

After we sacked the towering city of Priam in battle,
then he embarked with his share and a beautiful prize of distinction,
wholly unscarred, neither struck by a spear from afar in the battle
nor by the bronze in the close work of war, as happens so often;

Ares in blind fury makes no distinctions among men.”
Thus did I speak;

and the spirit of swift-footed Aeacus’ grandson
strode with long steps away through the fields of the pale asphodel plants,
joyful because I had said that his son had excelled among heroes.

All of the rest of the souls of the people who died and departed
stood there in sorrow, and each one asked of the things it held dearest.
Only the spirit of Telamon’s son, lord Ajax, remained far
off, still enraged at the victory I had secured and defeated
him when beside the vessels I argued my claim for the armor
worn by Achilles; his honored mother had offered the prizes,
sons of the Trojans made judgment of us, and Pallas Athena.
Would that I never had won such a victory! Down in the darkness
earth had enclosed such a head for the sake of that armor, lord Ajax,
he who surpassed all Danaans in bodily beauty and war-work,
all but the blameless son of Peleus, Achilles, the godlike.
Him I addressed as I tried to persuade him with honey-sweet language:
“Ajax, child of blameless Telamon, will you not ever,
even in death, put away your anger with me for the cursed
armor? The gods made that armor a plague for the Argive battalions;
such was the tower overthrown when you died. All the people Achaean
mourn for you always, no less than the head of the great lord Achilles,
Peleus’ son. No other is guilty of causing your sorrow,
only great Zeus, who hated the Danaan army of spearmen,
terribly, laying the doom that you suffered upon you in anger.
Come here, lord, so you may hear the word and the speech we would give you.
Conquer your fury and pride in the heart; let your anger be ended.”
Thus did I speak; he answered me nothing, but went on his journey,
joining the other souls in the Erebus of the departed.
There, although in his anger, he still might have spoken toward me,
or I to him; but the heart in the breast that was in me desired
there to behold the spirits of others among the departed.

There I beheld Minos, the splendid son born of great Zeus,
holding his scepter of gold and dispensing the laws to the dead men,
seated, while round him the dead were appealing their cases before him,
some of them seated, some standing throughout Hades’ wide-gated palace.
Then after him I distinguished the giant Orion,
herding together the beasts on the field of the pale asphodel plants,
creatures that he had killed on the lonely mountains in old days;
holding a club made entirely of bronze, forever unbroken.