The Odyssey — Book XI

The dead: Tiresias’s prophecy, Anticleia, the heroines, Agamemnon, Achilles, and Ajax.

When we had come to the ship and descended again to the seashore,
first we proceeded to launch the vessel on glittering sea-brine,
setting the mast with its sail in the hollow black ship as we labored;
then we took hold of the sheep and conveyed them aboard her, and we too
climbed there in grief, while the great tears fell from our eyes in abundance.
Circe behind our vessel, the dark-blue-prowed ship of the seaway,
sent us a following wind that filled out the sail, a companion
excellent, Circe of beautiful hair, dread goddess, humanly speaking.
Then, when we carefully tended the tackle throughout the black vessel,
taking our seats, we were borne on our way by the wind and the steersman.
All of the day was the sail spread wide as she crossed through the sea-depths;
then went the sun from the sky, and the roads of the world became darkened.

So she arrived at the limits of Ocean, deep in his current.
There is the land and the city inhabited by Cimmerian people,
always enveloped in mist and in cloud; for the sun in his brightness
never looks down on the people below with the light of his sunbeams,
neither ascending the sky and approaching the starry dominion,
nor when he turns from the heavens again toward earth and its creatures;
murderous night is extended above these miserable mortals.
Coming ashore, we beached the vessel and unloaded the sheep there;
then by the stream of Ocean we made our way on our journey,
till we arrived at the place that the goddess Circe appointed.

There Perimedes and faithful Eurylochus held the victims.
Drawing the sharp-edged sword that hung from beside my strong thigh there,
I dug a trench that extended a cubit in each of its measures;
round it I poured a libation to all of the people departed,
honey and milk being first, then sweet wine poured as the second,
water the third, and above these sprinkled the white flour of barley.
Earnestly then I entreated the strengthless heads of the dead men,
vowing that, after my coming to Ithaca, there in my palace
I would give them my best barren cow and heap treasures for burning;
then for Tiresias alone I would slaughter a black-fleeced
ram that excelled all the others in strength and in worth in my sheepfold.
When with my vows and my prayers I had called on the races of dead men,
taking the sheep, I cut both of their throats with the pitiless bronze blade
over the trench, and the dark blood flowed; and the spirits assembled,
souls of the people who died, coming upward from Erebus’ darkness:
brides and unmarried youths and the old men broken by sorrow,
delicate maidens whose hearts were newly acquainted with anguish,
many men wounded and torn by the bronze-pointed spears in the battle,
warriors slaughtered in war with their blood-dark armor upon them.
Flocking around the pit in their crowds from every direction,
making a terrible cry—and the pale fear captured my spirit.
Then I encouraged my men and commanded the faithful companions
there to be skinning the sheep that lay by the pitiless bronze slain,
burning the bodies and offering prayers before the immortals,
powerful Hades and dread Persephone, queen of the darkness.
Drawing for myself the sharp-edged sword from beside my strong thigh there,
I sat and did not allow the strengthless heads of the dead men
near to the blood until I had questioned Tiresias fully.