Phaedra I saw and Procris, and beautiful princess Ariadne,
daughter of deadly-minded king Minos, whom Theseus carried
once from the island of Crete, making sail for the sacred Athenian
hill, but he took no delight in her;

Artemis earlier killed her
there on the sea-ringed Dia, because Dionysus accused her.

Maera I saw, and Clymene, also detestable Eriphyle,
she who accepted precious gold for betraying the husband she married.

Yet I could never recount every woman I saw there or name them,
all of the wives and the daughters belonging to powerful heroes;

god-given night would come to an end before I had finished.

Now it is time I should sleep, whether going to my swift vessel
and my companions, or staying.

My sending belongs to the gods and to you all.”
Thus did he speak, and all of the people remained without speaking,
held by the spell of his story throughout the shadowy palace.

Then white-armed Arete arose and began to address them:

“Men of Phaeacia, how does this man now appear to your judgment,
both in his physical form and his stature and balanced perception?

He is my guest, but every one of you shares in the honor.

Therefore do not be eager to send him away, nor diminish
gifts to a man with such need, since many beautiful treasures
lie in your houses through all the generous will of immortals.”
Then the old hero Echeneus arose and addressed the assembly,
eldest of all of the other Phaeacian men by his birth date:

“Friends, our intelligent queen has not spoken wide of our purpose,
nor has she missed it;

obey every word that the queen has commanded.

Yet on Alcinous here both the word and the deed are depending.”
Then Alcinous answered the elder and said in response there:

“This word will stand, and as surely as I have my life and am reigning
over the oar-loving people Phaeacian, so I will fulfill it.

Let this guest, though he hungers for homecoming, bear to remain here
till tomorrow arrives and I make every gift full in measure.

All of the men will attend to his sending;

but I above others,
since in the land of Phaeacians I hold the kingly dominion.”
Then resourceful Odysseus addressed him in words of response there:

“Lord Alcinous, most renowned among all the peoples,
if you were asking that I should remain for a year in the palace,
then made ready my sending and gave me illustrious treasures,
even would I choose that, for it surely would be more profitable,
coming at last to the land that I love with a fuller possession.

Then I should certainly find myself more honored and cherished
among the people who saw me come sailing again to my Ithaca.”
Then Alcinous answered the hero and said in response there:

“Lord Odysseus, looking at you, we never could liken
you to a swindler or thief, such as dark earth nurtures in plenty,
scattering crops of such men through the length and the breadth of the nations,
fashioning falsehoods from things no mortal perception could question.

Beautiful form clothes every word, and within is a noble
spirit;

and just like a singer who knows, you have told us the story,
both the disastrous sorrows of Argives and those you encountered.

Come now, tell me this other, and speak with the truth as I ask you:

whether you saw there any of your companions, the godlike,
those who accompanied you into Troy and encountered their death there.

Marvelously long is the night, inexhaustible;

this is no hour yet
here in the hall to be sleeping.

Continue to tell me your wonders.

I could endure until shining Dawn in her glory appeared here,
if you could bear in the hall to recount every sorrow you suffered.”
Then resourceful Odysseus addressed him in words of response there:

“Lord Alcinous, most renowned among all the peoples,
there is a season for many a story, a season for sleeping.