Then came the spirit of lord Achilles, the son born of Peleus,
also Patroclus’ spirit, and blameless Antilochus with him,
Ajax as well, who exceeded in beauty and bodily stature
all of the Danaan host but the blameless son born of Peleus.

Then the soul of Aeacus’ swift-footed grandson knew me;

wailing aloud, he spoke, and these words took wing as he uttered:

“Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus endlessly resourceful,
reckless one, what deed even greater than this can your mind plan?

How did you dare come down into Hades’ realm, where the dead men
dwell without understanding, the phantoms of wearied mortals?”
Thus did he speak, and I answered the spirit and said in response then:

“Peleus’ son Achilles, most powerful far of Achaeans,
seeking Tiresias I came from necessity, hoping the prophet
might have a counsel to bring me again to ruggedly coasted Ithaca.

I have not yet gone near to Achaea, nor have I ever
set foot again on my land, but affliction is always around me.

Yet, Achilles, no man was ever more blessed than you in the old days,
neither before nor hereafter;

while living, the Argives revered you
just like the gods;

and now you rule powerfully here among dead men.

Therefore do not be grieved that you died, Achilles, the godlike.”
Thus did I speak, and at once his spirit responded in answer:

“Shining Odysseus, do not try soothing my death with your language.

I would prefer to be bound to the soil as the serf of another,
even a landless man who possesses a little subsistence,
rather by far than to rule over all of the dead who have wasted.

Come, tell me now of the son I have fathered, the proud-hearted young man:

whether he followed to war so that he might be first in the battle.

Tell me as well of the blameless Peleus, whatever you heard there:

whether he keeps the honor he had in the Myrmidon nation,
or is dishonored throughout both Hellas and Phthia because now
terrible old age captures his hands and his feet and confines him.

I no longer am there as his champion under the sunbeams,
such as I was in the former days when throughout the broad Troas
I killed the best of the armies, defending the people of Argos.

If I could come to the house of my father again for an hour,
such as I was, I would make my rage and unconquerable hands there
dreadful to those who abuse him with force and deny him his honor.”
Thus did he speak, and I answered the spirit and said in response then:

“Nothing concerning the blameless Peleus ever has reached me.

Yet of the son whom you love, Neoptolemus, I can recount you
all of the certain truth, as you ask and desire that I tell it.

I myself in my hollow and balanced vessel conveyed him,
out of the island of Scyros to join strong-greaved Achaeans.

Whenever around Troy’s city we shaped our counsels together,
always he spoke as the first, and his words never missed their intention;

godlike Nestor alone and I could surpass him in counsel.

Whenever we fought on the plain of the Trojans with bronze in our hands there,
never he lingered behind in the crowd and the press of the people,
but ran far out in front, yielding fury to none of the fighters,
slaughtering many men in the terrible shock of the battle.

All of the people he killed I could neither recount to you nor name,
all of the host he destroyed in defending the Argive battalions;

yet he killed such a man as the hero Eurypylus, Telephus’ offspring,
cutting him down with the bronze, and around him his numerous Ceteian
comrades were slaughtered because of the gifts to a woman presented.

Him I beheld as the handsomest man after Memnon, the noble.