Speaking, she fastened beneath her the beautiful sandals immortal,
golden, ambrosial sandals that bore her across the sea-water
also across the unbounded earth on the breath of the windstorm.
Taking her powerful spear, bronze-pointed and whetted to sharpness,
weighty and huge and unyielding, the spear that demolishes war-ranks,
ranks of the heroes who kindle the mighty-born goddess to anger,
down from the crests of Olympus she swept in a flashing descent then,
came to the land of Ithaca, stood at Odysseus' forecourt,
just on the outermost threshold, the bronze-pointed spear in her right hand,
seeming a stranger, the lord of the Taphians, Mentes the sea-king.

There she discovered the arrogant suitors, who then were amusing
each his own heart with the counters in front of the doors of the palace,
seated on hides of the oxen that they with their own hands had slaughtered.
Heralds were busily moving among them with diligent servants:
some men were mixing the wine and the water together in wine bowls,
others with sponges of many holes washed off the tables and polished
each, setting all of them forth, while the carvers apportioned the meat cuts.

Godlike Telemachus noticed her first, long before any other,
there with the suitors he sat, but his dear heart sorrowed within him,
minding his excellent father and seeing him inwardly: would he
come from afar, then scatter the suitors apart through the palace,
winning his honor again and becoming the lord of his household?
Thinking of this, as he sat with the suitors, he noticed Athena.
Straight to the forecourt he went, for his spirit was stung with resentment,
seeing the stranger stand long at the gates; he approached and stood near her,
taking her right hand in welcome, received the great bronze-pointed war-spear,
then he addressed her aloud, and his words had the swiftness of wingbeats:

“Welcome, my stranger; among us as friend you shall first be received here;
after you savor your supper, declare what occasion has brought you.”

Speaking, he led her within, and Pallas Athena came with him.
After the two of them entered the high-roofed hall of the palace,
carrying onward the spear, he set it beside a tall pillar,
there in the finely constructed spear-holder, standing with other
weapons in numbers belonging to patient and steadfast Odysseus.
Leading Athena, he seated her there on a throne, spreading linen
beautiful, cunningly wrought, with a footstool placed under her ankles.
Close by her side for himself he positioned a many-hued armchair,
far from the suitors, for fear that the stranger, oppressed by their uproar,
might take no pleasure in supper among those overbearing people;
also that he might inquire for his father, so long now departed.

Water for washing a servant brought in a beautiful golden
pitcher and poured it above a basin of silver beneath it,
so they could wash; then drew a polished table beside them.
Bread the respected housekeeper carried and set there before them,
adding abundant delicacies, freely bestowing her storehouse;
lifting the platters, a carver provided them meat of all kinds and
set them beside them, and also placed golden cups there before them.
Often the herald approached them and poured them the wine as they wanted.
