“Therefore, all of these things I shall tell you exactly and truly.
Mentes I boast I am, son of Anchialus, skilled in battle,
lord over Taphians also, a nation delighting in oar-work.
Now I have come with my vessel and comrades and put into harbor,
sailing the wine-dark sea on my way among alien speakers,
bound for Temese for bronze, with a cargo of fiery iron.
There is my ship, which is standing out there in the fields from the city,
anchored in Rheithron harbor below forest-mantled Mount Neion.
We from our fathers declare that our houses are friendly as guest-friends,
right from the first: you may ask the old man if you go to inquire there,
hero Laertes, although people say he no longer approaches
town, but resides in the countryside far off, suffering sorrows,
there with an elderly handmaid who carries his food and his wine cup
out to him, whenever weariness seizes the strength of his body,
slowly he creeps up the slope of the vineyard with dark-purple clusters.
Now I have come, for they told me your father was here with his people;
but he is not—the immortals have hampered his path of returning.
Godlike Odysseus has not yet died on the earth, I assure you,
still he is living and held on the broad sea away from his country,
held on a wave-washed island, and violent men have detained him,
savage and cruel, who keep him against his desire from returning.
Now I shall offer a prophecy, just as the gods in my spirit
cast it, and just as I think it is fated to reach its fulfillment,
though I am not any prophet nor learned in signs of the bird-flight.
Not for much longer shall he be away from the land of his fathers,
not even though he be fastened and held in the strongest of iron chains.
He shall devise his return, for his mind is abundant in stratagems.
Come, though, and tell me the following things, and recount them with candor:
Are you indeed, grown so tall as I see, son of great Odysseus?
You have a terrible likeness to him in your head and your fine eyes.
Often indeed did Odysseus and I meet together in friendship,
before he departed for Troy, when the rest of the Argive commanders,
all of the best of the Argives, embarked in the hollow-built vessels.
Never from then have I looked on Odysseus, nor has he seen me.”

Then in reply clear-minded Telemachus spoke and addressed her:

“Therefore, stranger, I now shall tell you exactly and truly.
Mother declares I am his; for myself I have no way of knowing:
never has any man known for himself who engendered his body.
Would I had rather been born as the son of a fortunate mortal,
one whom his old age found in the midst of possessions and riches.
Now from the most ill-fated of mortal men, so they tell me,
I have been sprung, since about him you ask me and press for an answer.”

Answering him once again was the gray-eyed goddess Athena:

“Never shall gods make your lineage nameless in days of the future,
since Penelope has borne such a son as yourself in her household.
Come, though, and tell me the following things, and recount them with candor:
What is the feast, what assembly is this, and what is your need here?
Is it a wedding or banquet? It is not a feast with contributions.
How unrestrained and exceedingly arrogant these men appear here,
feasting throughout the whole house! Any man would be moved to resentment,
seeing these manifold shames, if a sensible man came among them.”

Then in reply clear-minded Telemachus spoke and addressed her: