The Odyssey — Book 1

The gods take counsel; Athena visits Telemachus.

Tell me, O Muse, of the versatile man, who was driven to wander
after he ravaged the god-hallowed fortress—the city of Trojans.
Many the cities of men that he saw, and he learned of their thinking;
many the griefs he endured on the sea, in the depths of his own heart,
striving to save his own life and to bring his companions back homeward.
Still he could never deliver his comrades, for all of his striving:
for it was they, by their own witless outrage, who brought on their ruin—
fools, who had eaten the cattle of Helios, high-going Sun-god.
Helios robbed them of homecoming's day—the return to their homeland.
Choose where to start it, O goddess, O daughter of Zeus, and now tell us.

Then all the others, as many as fled from precipitous ruin,
rested at home, having fled from the war and the waste of the sea-way.
Only the one man, hungry for home and the sight of his own wife,
him did Calypso the queenly, most radiant goddess, detain there,
deep in her hollow caves, longing to hold him and make him her husband.
But as the seasons revolved, then the year came around in its circle
when the immortals had spun his return and his journey back homeward,
homeward to Ithaca; even on Ithaca, trials were waiting,
even among his own people. The gods were all moved to pity,
all but Poseidon: implacable rage in him burned without ceasing,
anger at godlike Odysseus, barring his road to his country.

Meanwhile Poseidon had gone far away to the distant Ethiopians,
the Ethiopians, parted in two, most distant of mortals,
some at the setting of high-going Helios, some at his rising.
Meeting Poseidon, they offered a hundred of bulls and of rams there.
There he delighted, attending the feast; but the rest of the deathless
gathered together inside of the halls of Olympian Zeus then.
First among all of them spoke out the father of men and immortals,
for in his mind he remembered Aegisthus, the man without blemish,
whom Agamemnon's illustrious son, young Orestes, had slaughtered.
Thinking of him, Zeus spoke these words to the deathless immortals:

“How astonishing, mortals are always accusing the gods now!
Out of the gods, they declare, come evils; and yet they themselves, too,
reckless beyond what is fated, are makers of all of their sorrows.
Just as Aegisthus, exceeding his fate, took the wife of Atreides,
wedded her, killing the warrior himself when at last he came homeward,
though he foresaw his destruction, for we had forewarned him ourselves when
Hermes we sent him, the keen-sighted slayer of Argus, commanding
neither to murder the man nor to court Agamemnon's own bedmate.
Vengeance would come from Orestes at last for the son of Atreus,
once he had come into manhood and yearned for the land of his fathers.
Hermes advised him, intending his good; but he never persuaded
Aegisthus' heart. He has paid the whole debt in a single hard moment.”

Then in reply spoke the gray-eyed goddess Athena directly: