For there was a sheen as of the sun or the moon
through the high-roofed house of great-hearted Alcinous.

Walls of bronze ran this way and that,
from the threshold to the inmost room, with a frieze of blue enamel round them;

doors of gold closed the close-built house within;

the doorposts standing on the bronze threshold were of silver,
the lintel above was silver, and the door-handle gold;

and on either side stood dogs of gold and silver
that Hephaestus had made with his knowing craft
to guard the house of great-hearted Alcinous —
creatures deathless and unaging all their days.

And within, seats stood along the wall this way and that,
from the threshold to the inmost room in an unbroken line, and over them
were thrown fine close-spun coverings, the work of women.

There the leaders of the Phaeacians would sit
drinking and eating:

what they had never failed.

And youths of gold on well-built pedestals
stood holding blazing torches in their hands,
lighting the nights through the house for the feasters.

And fifty slave-women serve the house:

some grind the apple-gold grain at the mill,
others weave at the looms and turn the spindles,
sitting close as the leaves of a tall poplar,
and from the close-woven linen the soft oil runs.

As far as the Phaeacian men are skilled beyond all others
at driving a fast ship on the sea, so are their women
masters of the loom:

for Athena has given them beyond others
knowledge of beautiful work, and noble minds.

And outside the courtyard, close by the doors, is a great orchard
of four acres, with a hedge driven round it on both sides.

There tall trees grow in full leaf and flower:

pears and pomegranates and apple trees bright with fruit,
sweet figs and olives in full flourish.

Their fruit never perishes, never fails,
winter or summer, the year round;

but always
the breathing West Wind sets some growing, ripens others:

pear grows old upon pear, apple upon apple,
grape-cluster upon cluster, fig upon fig.

And there his vineyard, heavy with fruit, is rooted,
one part of it a drying-ground on level open earth,
baking in the sun;

other grapes they are gathering,
and others they are treading;

and out in front are the unripe ones,
one row shedding its blossom, another darkening toward purple.

And there, by the last row of vines, grow ordered beds
of greens of every kind, shining the whole year through;

and two springs:

one is scattered through all the garden,
the other dives under the courtyard threshold and runs
toward the high house, where the townsfolk drew their water.

Such were the shining gifts of the gods in the house of Alcinous.