And then Odysseus rose to go to the city;

and Athena,
with kind thought for Odysseus, poured a thick mist around him,
so that no great-hearted Phaeacian, crossing his path,
might needle him with words and ask him who he was.

But when he was on the point of entering the lovely city,
there the goddess, gray-eyed Athena, met him,
in the likeness of a young girl, unwed, carrying a pitcher.

She stopped in front of him, and noble Odysseus asked her:

"Child, would you not guide me to the house of a man
named Alcinous, who is lord among these people?

I am a stranger, hard-worn, come here
from far away, out of a distant country:

so I know not one
of the people whose city and land this is."
Then the goddess spoke to him again, gray-eyed Athena:

"Then I will show you, father stranger, the house you bid me
show:

for he lives close by my own blameless father.

Only go in silence, so, and I will lead the way:

do not look at any of the people, and ask no questions.

For these men do not much endure strangers,
nor welcome with open love the man who comes from elsewhere.

They trust instead in their fast ships, their swift ones,
and cross the great gulf on them, since the earth-shaker granted it:

ships swift as a wing, or as a thought."
So speaking, Pallas Athena led the way
swiftly, and he followed in the footsteps of the god.

And the Phaeacians, famed for ships, never marked him
going through the city among them:

Athena
of the lovely braids would not allow it — the dread goddess —
who poured a wondrous haze around him, with kind thought in her heart.

And Odysseus wondered at the harbors and the trim ships,
at the gathering-places of the heroes themselves, and the walls,
long and high, fitted with palisades, a wonder to see.

But when they came to the king's famous house,
the goddess, gray-eyed Athena, began to speak among them:

"Here, father stranger, is the house you bid me
show you.

You will find the Zeus-nurtured kings
feasting at the feast.

Go in, and let your heart
fear nothing:

the bold man proves the better man
in every venture, though he come from another country.

First you will come upon the mistress in the halls:

Arete is the name she is called, and she comes of the same
parents, the very ones who fathered King Alcinous.

Nausithous first was born from Poseidon the earth-shaker
and Periboea, loveliest of women,
youngest daughter of great-hearted Eurymedon,
who once was king over the overweening Giants —
but he destroyed his reckless people, and was destroyed himself.

With her Poseidon lay, and fathered a son,
great-hearted Nausithous, who ruled among the Phaeacians;

and Nausithous fathered Rhexenor and Alcinous.

Rhexenor — still without a son, a bridegroom in his hall —
Apollo of the silver bow struck down, leaving one only child,
Arete.

Her Alcinous made his wife,
and honored her as no other woman on earth is honored,
of all the wives who now keep house under their husbands:

so heartfelt is the honor she has held, and holds still,
from her dear children and from Alcinous himself
and from the people, who look on her as on a god
and greet her with blessings when she walks through the town.

For she herself has no lack of noble understanding:

for those she favors — even men — she dissolves quarrels.

If she once takes kindly thought for you in her heart,
then there is hope you will see your own people, and come
to your high-roofed house and your own fatherland."
So speaking, gray-eyed Athena went away
over the barren sea, and left lovely Scheria,
and came to Marathon and wide-wayed Athens,
and entered the close-built house of Erechtheus.

But Odysseus
went toward the famous house of Alcinous, and his heart
was churning as he stood there, before he reached the threshold of bronze.