There much-enduring noble Odysseus stood gazing.

And when his heart had wondered at it all,
he stepped quickly over the threshold into the house.

He found the leaders and counselors of the Phaeacians
pouring from their cups to the sharp-eyed slayer of Argus,
to whom they poured last of all, when they thought of sleep.

But much-enduring noble Odysseus went on through the house
wrapped in the thick mist Athena had poured around him,
until he came to Arete and to King Alcinous.

And Odysseus threw his arms around Arete's knees —
and then, just then, the god-sent mist poured back off him.

And they fell dumb through the house at the sight of the man,
and stared in wonder.

And Odysseus made his plea:

"Arete, daughter of godlike Rhexenor:

to your husband, to your knees, I come after much labor —
and to these feasters.

May the gods grant them fortunate
lives;

and may each hand down to his children
the wealth in his halls, and the honors the people have given him.

But for me — speed my sending, that I may come to my fatherland,
and quickly:

for long now, far from my own people, I suffer pains."
So speaking he sat down on the hearth, in the ashes
by the fire;

and they were all hushed in silence.

At long last the old hero Echeneus spoke —
a man elder-born beyond the other Phaeacians,
who excelled in speech, knowing many things grown old with him;

with good will toward them he spoke to the assembly:

"Alcinous, this is not the fairer way — it is not fitting —
a stranger sitting on the ground, on the hearth, in the ashes,
while these men hold themselves in, waiting for your word.

Come — raise the stranger up, and seat him on a chair
with silver studs, and bid the heralds
mix more wine, so that to Zeus who delights in thunder
we may pour also — the god who walks beside honored suppliants;

and let the housekeeper give the stranger supper from her stores."
And when the sacred strength of Alcinous heard it,
he took the hand of battle-wise Odysseus, the man of shifting counsels,
raised him from the hearth and set him on a shining chair,
making his son stand up — kind-hearted Laodamas,
who sat beside him, and whom he loved the most.

A handmaid brought water for their hands in a pitcher,
a beautiful golden one, and poured it over a silver basin
for them to wash, and drew up a polished table beside them.

The grave housekeeper brought bread and set it before them,
laying out delicacies in plenty, giving gladly of her store;

and he drank and ate, much-enduring noble Odysseus.

And then the strength of Alcinous said to the herald:

"Pontonous, mix the bowl, and serve out the wine
to all in the hall, so that to Zeus who delights in thunder
we may pour also — the god who walks beside honored suppliants."
So he spoke, and Pontonous mixed the honey-hearted wine
and served all, pouring first drops in each cup for the gods.

But when they had poured, and drunk what their hearts would have,
Alcinous addressed them all, and said:

"Hear me, leaders and counselors of the Phaeacians,
while I say what the heart in my breast commands.

Now you have feasted:

go home and take your rest;

in the morning we will call more of the elders together
and host the stranger in the halls, and offer the gods
fine victims;

and after that we will think also
of his sending, so that without labor or pain this stranger
may come, under our escort, to his own fatherland
rejoicing, and quickly, though he come from very far,
and suffer no evil or harm midway
before he sets foot in his own land.

There, afterward,
he will suffer whatever Destiny and the grave Spinners
spun in his thread at his birth, when his mother bore him.

But if he is one of the deathless ones, come down from heaven,
then this is some new thing the gods are devising: