Seventeen days I sailed on, crossing the water,
and on the eighteenth appeared the shadowy mountains
of your land, and my own heart was glad —
ill-fated as I was:

for I was yet to keep company with misery
in plenty, sent upon me by Poseidon the earth-shaker,
who loosed the winds against me and barred my road,
and stirred up a sea past all speaking;

nor would the wave
let me be carried on my raft, for all my thick groaning.

The squall then shattered the raft to pieces.

But I
swam — cut my way across that gulf — until wind and water
carried me near, and brought me to your land.

There, as I climbed out, the wave would have forced me onto the shore,
dashing me on the great rocks in a joyless place;

but I gave way, and swam back out, until I came
to a river, where at last the ground seemed best to me,
clear of stones, and there was shelter from the wind.

I dropped there, gathering my spirit back;

and ambrosial night
came on.

I climbed out clear of the heaven-fed river
and fell asleep in the bushes, and heaped the fallen leaves
around me;

and a god poured down boundless sleep.

There in the leaves, my heart worn down with grief,
I slept the whole night through, and dawn, and midday;

the sun was slanting down when sweet sleep let me go.

And I saw your daughter's handmaids on the beach
at play, and she among them, like the goddesses.

To her I made my plea.

And she did not fail in noble understanding —
as you would not hope of the young when you meet them
face to face:

for the young are forever thoughtless.

She gave me bread in plenty, and fire-bright wine,
and a bath in the river, and gave me these clothes.

That, for all my grieving, is the truth of it, told through."
Then Alcinous answered him in turn, and said:

"Stranger, in this one point, truly, my child did not see
rightly:

that she did not bring you with her attendant women
to our house — when she was the first you supplicated."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered him:

"Hero, do not scold your blameless daughter for that.

She did tell me to follow along with her handmaids;

it was I who would not — out of fear, out of shame,
lest perhaps your own heart darken at the sight:

we are jealous-minded things, we tribes of men upon the earth."
Then Alcinous answered him in turn, and said:

"Stranger, the heart in my breast is not the kind
to take fire for nothing.

Due measure is better in all things.

If only — father Zeus, Athena, Apollo!

—
being the man you are, and thinking as I think,
you would take my daughter and be called my son-in-law,
staying here:

I would give you a house and possessions —
if you stayed willingly.

Against your will no Phaeacian
shall hold you:

father Zeus forbid such a thing.

As for your sending, I appoint it — be sure of it —
for tomorrow.

Till then you will lie mastered by sleep,
and they will row the calm, until you come
to your fatherland and your house, and whatever place is dear to you,
though it be far, much farther than Euboea —
which those of our people say is farthest of all
who saw it, when they carried fair-haired Rhadamanthus
out to visit Tityus, the son of Earth.

They went all the way there, and finished it without strain,
and on the same day accomplished the journey home again.

And you shall know for yourself, in your own heart, how far my ships
are the best — and my young men at throwing up the sea with the oar-blade."
So he spoke;

and much-enduring noble Odysseus was glad,
and he spoke in prayer, and said a word, and named:

"Father Zeus, may Alcinous accomplish all
he has said: