for always in time past the gods have shown themselves openly
to us, whenever we offer glorious hecatombs,
and they feast beside us, sitting where we sit.

And if a lone traveler on the road meets them,
they use no disguise with us — for we are of near kin,
like the Cyclopes and the wild tribes of the Giants."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered him:

"Alcinous, let your mind be easy on that count.

I am not
like the deathless ones who hold wide heaven,
not in build, not in bearing:

I am like mortal men.

Whoever you know among mankind who carry the heaviest
loads of misery — it is to them I would compare my pains.

Yes, and I could tell a still longer tale of evils,
all that I have labored through by the gods' will.

But let me eat my supper, for all my grief:

for there is nothing more dog-shameless than the hateful belly,
which commands a man to remember it, by force,
however worn he is, however deep the sorrow in his heart —
as I have sorrow in my heart, and still this thing
forever bids me eat and drink, and makes me forget
all I have suffered, and orders me:

be filled.

But you — bestir yourselves at the showing of dawn,
to set me, unlucky as I am, on my own fathers' soil,
even after all I have suffered.

And let life leave me once I have seen
my own possessions, my slaves, and my great high-roofed house."
So he spoke, and they all approved it and urged
that the stranger be sent home, since he had spoken rightly.

But when they had poured, and drunk what their hearts would have,
the others went home to sleep, each man to his own house,
and noble Odysseus was left behind in the hall,
and beside him sat Arete and godlike Alcinous,
while the handmaids cleared away the service of the feast.

And white-armed Arete began to speak among them —
for she had recognized the mantle and the tunic, seeing the beautiful
clothes she herself had made with her attendant women —
and lifting her voice she spoke winged words to him:

"Stranger, this question first, and I ask it myself:

What man are you, and from where?

Who gave you these clothes?

Did you not say you came here wandering over the sea?"
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered her:

"It is hard, my queen, to tell my griefs straight through
to the end:

the gods of heaven have given me so many.

But this I will tell you, since you ask it of me and inquire.

There is an island, Ogygia, lying far off in the sea,
where the daughter of Atlas lives — guileful Calypso
of the lovely braids, a dread goddess;

and no one
mixes with her, no god, no mortal man.

But me — unlucky me — some power brought to her hearth
alone, after Zeus with a hurl of the white lightning had shattered
my fast ship apart in the middle of the wine-dark sea.

There all the rest of my brave companions perished,
but I threw my arms round the keel of my curved ship
and was carried nine days;

and on the tenth, in the black night,
the gods brought me near the island Ogygia, where Calypso
lives, she of the lovely braids, the dread goddess.

And she took me in
and loved me and tended me devotedly, and promised
to make me deathless and unaging all my days;

but she never once persuaded the heart in my breast.

There I stayed seven years unbroken, and forever wet
with my tears the immortal clothing Calypso gave me.

But when the eighth year came wheeling round for me,
then at last she urged me — commanded me — to go,
whether by some message from Zeus, or her own mind had turned.

She sent me off on a raft bound plank to plank, and gave me much —
bread and sweet wine — and dressed me in immortal clothing,
and sent up a fair wind for me, harmless and warm.