“Young Telemachus, never again shall you prove weak or witless,
if in your spirit is planted the excellent strength of your father—
such was the man in accomplishing action and spoken intention.
Then shall your journey be neither delayed nor deprived of fulfillment.
Yet if you are not truly the son of himself and Penelope,
no hope have I that you ever shall bring your intention to action.
Few are the sons, it is true, who arise to the stature of fathers;
most men are worse than their fathers, and few are the better.
Since you shall never again prove a coward or witless in counsel,
since the intelligence once in Odysseus has not wholly failed you,
hope remains that you surely shall bring this endeavor to action.
Therefore dismiss from your mind all the plans and designs of the suitors,
men without sense, for no sound understanding or justice is in them.
Nothing they know of the death and the darkening doom that is near them,
standing beside them, to sweep them away on a single day's dawning.
Not for much longer shall this expedition of yours be postponed now.
Such an ancestral companion am I, and prepared to assist you:
I shall equip you a fast-running ship and myself shall go with you.
Go to your house and again move among all the arrogant suitors;
gather provisions and pack every portion in fitting containers,
wine in the two-handled jars, barley meal, mortal men's very marrow,
stored in the close-fitted skins. I shall go through the town and assemble
willing companions at once. Many ships in sea-circled Ithaca,
newly constructed and old, are possessed by the island's inhabitants.
I shall inspect them for you and select from among them the finest;
swiftly we then shall equip her and launch on the width of the sea-way.”

Thus spoke Athena, the daughter of Zeus, and no longer did he then,
young Telemachus, linger after the goddess's voice came upon him.
Homeward he went on his way, while his heart in his breast was afflicted.
There he discovered the lordly suitors inside of the palace,
singeing the hogs in the courtyard and stripping the hides from the goat-flesh.
Straight at Telemachus came Antinous, smiling with laughter,
took the young man by the hand and addressed him aloud by his name there:

“High-spoken young Telemachus, ungoverned in anger, no longer
trouble your spirit with evil designs or with angry expressions.
Come now, eat and drink at my side in the way you did formerly.
All of these needs the Achaeans shall gladly supply and accomplish,
giving a ship and selected companions, that sooner you come to
sacred Pylos and gather a word of your excellent father.”

Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:

“How, Antinous, could I among you insolent suitors
eat at my ease and in silence enjoy the repose of a banquet?
Was it not plenty that all this while, you suitors, were cutting
all my possessions apart, many excellent things, while a child still?
Now I am grown, and by hearing the speeches of others have learned things,
while in the depths of my body my courage is rising and swelling.
I shall endeavor to fasten a doom of destruction upon you,
whether I travel to Pylos or stay in the land of my fathers.
Go I shall, and the journey I speak of shall not be an empty
errand—a passenger, since I possess neither ship nor companions,
just as your lordships no doubt have decided was more to your profit.”

Thus he spoke and easily wrenched his hand from Antinous' clutches.
Through the house, all of the suitors attended the work of the banquet,
mocking the young man and throwing abusive expressions upon him.
Thus would one arrogant youth make a speech to the rest of his fellows: