Thus spoke Telemachus. Zeus of the thunderous voice sent two eagles,
down from a towering mountain's summit releasing their flight-path.
First, for a while, they flew with the gusting and turbulent wind-stream,
keeping together and stretching their pinions alongside each other.
Then, when they came to the midst of the many-voiced Ithacan council,
wheeling around they beat their wings with a thickening clamor,
glaring on all of the heads underneath, with destruction in eyesight.
Raking each other with talons around the cheeks and the neckbones,
rightward away they darted across all the houses and city.
People were filled with astonishment, seeing the birds with their own eyes,
pondering deep in their hearts what fulfillment the omen portended.
Then the old hero Halitherses arose to address them,
Mastor's son, who surpassed all the men of his own generation,
reading the flight of the birds and explaining the purposes fated.
Wishing them well, he arose and addressed the assembled Achaeans:

“Hear me, you men who inhabit our Ithaca, hear what I tell you—
most of all to the suitors I speak and declare what is coming.
Over their heads an enormous destruction is rolling. Odysseus
shall not remain any longer removed from the land and his loved ones.
Already near us, he plants the beginnings of murder and black death,
meant for these men, every one; and a sorrow shall come upon many
others who live here on Ithaca under the brightness of heaven.
Long before that, let us now take counsel on how to restrain them—
better, let them restrain their own deeds, and the sooner the better.
No inexperienced prophet am I, but accomplished in bird-lore.
All is approaching for him in accordance with what I foretold him,
back when the Argives embarked for the pastures of horses at Ilium,
while in their company went the resourceful and wise Odysseus.
I said, after sufferings many, with all his companions destroyed there,
known to no man, in the twentieth year he would come to his homeland.
All I foretold him before is now reaching its destined fulfillment.”

Then in reply spoke Eurymachus, excellent son born of Polybus: