Thus he spoke; and the old woman swore the great oath of immortals.
Then, when the oath had been sworn and its words brought at last to completion,
straightway she drew off the wine for his journey in two-handled vessels,
poured out the barley meal for him into the close-fitted leather.
Young Telemachus went to the hall and again joined the suitors.
Then the gray-eyed goddess Athena conceived a new purpose.
Taking the form of Telemachus, throughout the town she went roaming,
standing beside every man and addressing him clearly with orders,
bidding him come in the evening and gather beside the swift vessel.
Then from Noemon, the splendid son of the wise man Phronius,
she asked a swift-running ship, which he willingly promised to lend her.
Down went the sun at the last, and the roadways were shadowed in darkness.
Then she drew down the swift ship and set in its well-fashioned body
all of the gear that is commonly carried by ships with good benches.
Close to the harbor's edge she moored her; courageous companions around her
gathered as one, while the goddess awakened the heart of each sailor.
Then the gray-eyed goddess Athena conceived a new purpose.
Off she departed and entered the house of the godlike Odysseus.
There she diffused sweet sleep on the suitors and clouded their senses,
striking the cups from their hands while they drank and bewildering all of them.
Through the town they staggered to sleep, no longer remaining
seated at feasting, for slumber was falling across their eyelids.
Then to Telemachus spoke the gray-eyed goddess Athena,
calling him out to the front of the well-built halls of his household,
having assumed Mentor's body, resembling also his speech-voice:

“Young Telemachus, already your strong-greaved comrades are seated,
holding the oars in their hands and awaiting your word of departure.
Come, let us go, and no longer delay the beginning of travel.”

Thus having spoken, Athena, the goddess, proceeded before him,
rapidly, while Telemachus followed the steps of the goddess.
Then, when the two had come down to the ship and the shore of the sea-way,
there they discovered the long-haired companions upon the sand-beach,
and the sacred strength of Telemachus spoke and addressed them:

“Come now, companions, and let us bring down our provisions; already
all are collected together inside of the hall. Of our purpose
Mother knows nothing, nor any of our women, excepting one only.”