“Old man, go home and announce your prophecies there to your children,
lest an affliction befall them at some time in days that are coming.
I am a prophet far better than you on the matter before us.
Many the birds that are flying about underneath the sun's brightness;
not every bird is an omen. As for the absent Odysseus,
far off he died, and I wish you had likewise been lost with Odysseus.
Then you would not be delivering prophecies here in abundance,
nor would you sharpen the anger of young Telemachus further,
hoping that he may bestow on your household a gift in repayment.
Now I shall tell you a thing, and I promise its sure execution:
if, with the knowledge of age and the many events you remember,
you should beguile a much younger man and encourage his anger,
first it shall make the result more painful by far for the young man,
though he shall never accomplish a thing on account of your speaking;
then on yourself, old man, we shall fasten a fine whose repayment
galls you in spirit, and bitterly hard shall its punishment hurt you.
Here is the counsel I give Telemachus here in the sight of the people:
let him command his mother to go to the house of her father.
There they can furnish a wedding and give all the bride-gifts appropriate,
many and splendid, the gifts that should follow a cherished daughter.
Not before then do I think that Achaea's sons shall abandon
arduous courtship. No man makes us tremble with fear or anxiety,
not Telemachus, no, notwithstanding his flood of oration;
nor do we value the prophecy, old man, which you are proclaiming,
all unfulfilled, for it only makes you the more to be hated.
Just as before shall his property all be consumed without payment,
while she continues to put the Achaeans off from her marriage.
We shall continue to wait, in contentious pursuit of the woman,
rivals because of her excellence, never pursuing the others,
women whom any of us might appropriately take into marriage.”

Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:

“You, Eurymachus, all of you other imperious suitors,
I shall no longer entreat you or talk of the matter before you.
Now the immortals are perfectly aware, and all the Achaeans.
Come, but provide me a ship that is swift and a crew of companions,
twenty in number, to make my voyage there and return me.
I shall be traveling first to the sands of Pylos, then Sparta,
seeking a word of the homeward return of my long-absent father.
Maybe a mortal can tell me, or I may discover the Rumor
born out of Zeus, which beyond other messengers carries men's tidings.
If I am told that my father is living and making his homeward
journey, although I am ground down by grief, I can bear it a year more.
Yet if I hear he is dead and no longer exists among mortals,
then I shall come once again to the land of my fathers that loves me,
heap up a tomb for my father and furnish the rites that are proper,
many and splendid, and afterward give my mother in marriage.”

Thus he spoke and sat down; then Mentor arose in the council,
Mentor who long had been comrade and friend to the blameless Odysseus.
Sailing away in the ships, Odysseus left him the household,
bidding them all obey the old man, who should safeguard possessions.
Wishing them well, he arose and addressed the assembled Achaeans: