The Odyssey — Book 2

The assembly at Ithaca; Penelope's web; Telemachus sails by night.

When Dawn in her earliness rose with her rose-colored fingers,
then from his bed rose up the dear son of steadfast Odysseus.
Dressing himself, he slung the keen sword at once on his shoulder,
under his radiant feet he bound on the beautiful sandals,
out of his chamber he strode, in his face like a godhead immortal.
Straightway he called to the clear-voiced heralds and firmly commanded
all of the long-haired Achaeans be summoned at once to assembly.
Loudly the heralds proclaimed it; the people assembled in haste there.
Then, when the men had assembled and all were collected together,
he made his way to the meeting, a bronze-pointed spear in his palm held,
not by himself, for two swift-footed hounds came along in attendance.
Over his person Athena diffused an ineffable splendor.
All of the people regarded his coming with eyes full of wonder;
down in his father's seat he sat, and the elders made way there.

First of them all to address the assembly was Aegyptius, hero,
bent under age, and in knowledge of numberless matters abundant.
One of his well-loved sons had departed with godlike Odysseus,
sailing in hollow ships to the country of Ilium's horses—
Antiphus, spearman; the savage and pitiless Cyclops had killed him
deep in his cavern and made him the last of the men for his supper.
Three other sons were alive: one mingled among the proud suitors,
named Eurynomus, while two always worked on the lands of their father.
Still he could never forget that lost son, but lamented and mourned him.
Weeping for him, he arose and addressed the assembled Achaeans:

“Hear me, you men who inhabit our Ithaca, hear what I tell you.
Never has one of our councils convened, nor assembly been seated,
since in the hollow ships our noble Odysseus departed.
Who has assembled us now? Upon whom has necessity fallen,
whether he stands with the young generation or those who are elder?
Has he received any word that the army is homeward returning,
something to tell us in public because he was first to discover?
Or does he bring some other affair of the people for counsel?
Surely he seems a good man and a blessed one. May Zeus accomplish
good for the man, whatsoever desire in his heart he is seeking.”

Thus he spoke; and in that word's omen Odysseus' son was rejoicing.
No longer seated, he rose, for desire now impelled him to speak there.
Into the midst he advanced, and a scepter was placed in his right hand
there by Peisenor the herald, a man of considerate judgment.
First to the elder he turned, and he spoke to him openly, saying: