‘Young men who court me, because great Odysseus now has been taken,
wait, though you urge on the marriage, until I have finished this weaving;
let not the threads I have spun be abandoned and scattered for nothing.
This is a shroud for the hero Laertes, against that dark morning
when the destructive allotment of death, laying mortals low, takes him.
Then no Achaean woman around us can censure or shame me
if such a man who amassed great wealth should be laid without grave-cloth.’

Thus she addressed us, and easily won our imperious spirits.
Then in the daytime she wove at the loom and accomplished her great web;
then in the nighttime, under the torches, again she unraveled.
Three years long she concealed her deception and fooled the Achaeans.
Yet when the fourth year came, as the seasons revolved in their order,
one of her women revealed it, a servant aware of the secret;
then we discovered her loosening all of the radiant fabric.
So she completed the work by compulsion, although she resisted.
Now hear the suitors' response, so that you in your heart may perceive it,
and so the whole of Achaea may likewise possess the assurance:
send your own mother away and command her to enter a marriage,
taking the man whom her father appoints and who also delights her.
But if she continues distressing the sons of Achaeans much longer,
keeping in mind those gifts above women Athena bestowed her—
knowledge of beautiful handiwork, excellence, generous judgment,
cleverness such as we never have heard of in women before her,
even the fair-haired daughters of old in Achaea's tradition,
Tyro, Alcmene, and Mycene wearing the beautiful headband—
none of those women possessed an intelligence equal to hers now.
Yet in devising this purpose, her judgment has not been becoming.
Just for as long shall they ravenously eat your possessions
while she maintains this intent which the gods are now placing within her.
Great is the glory she wins for herself by her cunning invention,
yet for your house she creates only grief for abundant resources.
We shall not go to our lands, nor depart for another location,
till she selects an Achaean at last and accomplishes marriage.”

Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:

“How, Antinous, could I expel her unwillingly homeward,
she who has borne me and raised me, while somewhere my father is living,
whether alive or now dead? Heavy payment would fall upon me then,
owed to Icarius, should I by my own will send off my mother.
Evil would come from her father, and heaven would add to my sorrows,
since as she left this house, she would call the detestable Furies,
praying against me; and mortals would likewise reproach and revile me.
Therefore the word that you ask me to say shall be spoken out never.
But if your own hearts find any shame in the deeds you accomplish,
go from my halls and prepare other feasts for yourselves and your fellows,
eating your own possessions and visiting house after household.
Yet if you think it is better for you and more profitable also
one man's abundance be wasted away with no restitution,
ravage it all. I shall call on the gods who are living forever,
praying that Zeus may at last bring deeds of requital upon you;
then you shall die in the halls with no blood-price paid in requital.”