“Hear me, you men who inhabit our Ithaca, hear what I tell you.
Never again let a king with a scepter be gentle and gracious,
kind in his heart, or consider the right and appropriate measure;
rather, forever be cruel in mind and accomplish injustice.
No one remembers the godlike Odysseus now in the country,
none of the people he governed, although as a father he loved them.
Yet I am less indignant against the imperious suitors,
even for violent deeds that they weave in their ill-meaning spirits.
They set their own living heads as a stake while violently eating
all of Odysseus' house in the faith he shall never return here.
No, I am angry at all of the rest of the people—at all you,
sitting in silence and never attacking the suitors with language,
never restraining the few, though the people are many in number.”

Then Leocritus, Evenor's son, in reply spoke against him:

“Mentor, destructive and crazed in your wits, what a word you have spoken,
urging the people to stop us! A struggle is hard to accomplish,
fighting with men over feasting, especially men who outnumber.
Even suppose that Odysseus, Ithacan-born, should come homeward,
finding the lordly suitors at feasting within his own household,
and in his spirit determine to drive all the men from his dwelling:
no joy at all would his wife have then in the man she was longing
ever to welcome; an ugly death he would meet on the threshold,
fighting so many. Your speech has not found an appropriate measure.
Come now, people, disperse, and let each man return to his labor.
Mentor and old Halitherses can hasten the young man's departure,
since from the first they were both the companions and friends of his father.
Yet he will sit for a long time here, I imagine, collecting
news upon Ithaca; never will he bring this journey to action.”

Thus he spoke and at once brought the people's assembly to ending.
Each man scattered away and returned to the house where he lived then;
all of the suitors went into the house of the godlike Odysseus.
But by himself to the sands of the seashore went Telemachus,
washing his hands in the gray-colored sea, and he prayed to Athena:

“Hear me, divinity, you who came yesterday into our household,
bidding me sail in a ship on the face of the mist-covered sea-way,
seeking a word of the homeward return of my long-absent father.
All my designs the Achaeans obstruct and delay from fulfillment,
most of them all these suitors, abusive and swollen with outrage.”

Thus he prayed, and Athena approached and was standing beside him,
having assumed Mentor's body, resembling also his speech-voice.
Raising her voice she addressed him at once with these words that had feathers: