“Clearly young Telemachus plans the destruction and death of us all now!
Either from sandy Pylos he shall bring back men to avenge him,
or out of Sparta, because of the terrible zeal that impels him.
Maybe he means to go into the rich-soiled country of Ephyra,
bringing back poisons that waste human life, to be cast in the wine bowl,
killing us all when the wine has been mixed and distributed to us.”

Thus would another arrogant youth make a speech to his fellows:

“Who can be certain? Perhaps, having boarded the hollow-built vessel,
far from his people he too shall be lost in his wandering, like Odysseus.
Then our labor and trouble would surely be doubled among us:
all his possessions would have to be shared and divided among us;
then we should give his mother the house, and the man who shall wed her.”

Thus they spoke, but he entered the lofty room of his father,
spacious and high in the roof, where bronze lay heaped up with treasure,
gold and clothing in chests, and abundance of fragrant olive oil.
There great vessels were standing that held old wine in their bellies,
sweet to be drunk, with the pure and divine-tasting drink sealed within them,
set in a row by the wall for the day when Odysseus, suffering
many afflictions, might nevertheless come again to his household.
Closely constructed doors had been fitted and locked on the chamber,
double in thickness; and night and day an intelligent woman
guarded it all with the deep understanding contained in her spirit,
old Eurycleia, the daughter of Ops, who was born from Peisenor.
Calling her into the storeroom, young Telemachus then said:

“Nurse, come now, and draw some wine for me into the two-handled vessels,
sweet and the finest in flavor, excepting the portion reserved there,
held while you think of that ill-fated man, if Odysseus somehow,
Zeus-born, comes home after slipping away from destruction and death-doom.
Fill up twelve for me now and provide every vessel a cover.
Then pour barley meal for me into the close-fitted leather,
twenty whole measures of barley grain pulverized under millstones.
Keep this alone in your knowledge and leave it collected together.
Evening shall see me come for it all when the hour has arrived and
Mother has gone to her upper apartment, preparing for slumber.
I shall be traveling first to the sands of Pylos, then Sparta,
seeking a word of my dear father's homecoming, if I can hear one.”

Thus he spoke, and Eurycleia, his nurse from his infancy, wailed then,
grieving aloud and addressing him straightway with words that had feathers:

“Why has this thought, dear child, arisen inside of your spirit?
Where can you travel across the immeasurable breadth of the earth now,
only and well-beloved son? Far from home he has perished,
Zeus-born great Odysseus, somewhere in lands of the strangers.
Those men, as soon as you leave, will fashion behind you their evils,
killing you under deception and sharing your property with them.
Stay with possessions that here are your own and remain in your household.
No need is laid upon you to be hurt on the barren sea, wandering.”

Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:

“Courage, my nurse; for the purpose is made in alliance with godhead.
Swear to me now that you shall not tell my dear mother about it,
not till the eleventh day has arrived, or the twelfth in its order,
or till she misses me first and discovers herself my departure,
lest she should damage her beautiful skin with lamenting and weeping.”