But Pallas Athena went her way to wide-dancing-grounded Lacedaemon
to remind the shining son of great-hearted Odysseus
of his homecoming, and to stir him to return.

She found Telemachus and Nestor's splendid son
sleeping in the forecourt of glorious Menelaus —
Nestor's son, at least, mastered by soft sleep;

but no sweet sleep held Telemachus:

through the ambrosial night
cares for his father kept his heart awake.

And gray-eyed Athena stood near him and spoke:

"Telemachus, it is no longer good, this roaming far from home
with your goods abandoned, and men in your own house
of such overbearing insolence — or they will devour it all,
dividing your goods among them, and your journey come to nothing.

Rouse Menelaus of the great war-cry — quickly —
to send you off, so you may find your blameless mother still at home.

For already her father and her brothers press her
to marry Eurymachus:

he outbids all the suitors
in gifts, and keeps raising the bride-price higher.

Take care nothing is carried from the house against your will.

You know what kind of heart is in a woman's breast:

she wants to swell the house of the man who marries her,
and of her former children, of the wedded husband she has lost,
she thinks no more once he is dead.

She asks nothing.

No — go back yourself and put everything in the hands
of whichever of the slave-women seems the best to you,
until the gods reveal to you your honored bride.

And another word I will tell you:

lay it up in your heart.

The best men of the suitors lie in wait for you — deliberately —
in the strait between Ithaca and rugged Samos,
hungry to kill you before you reach your fathers' land.

But I do not look for that.

No:

sooner will the earth close over
more than one of the suitor-men who eat away your living.

Keep your well-made ship far out from the islands,
and sail by night as well as day:

that one of the deathless ones
who guards and keeps you will send a breeze behind you.

And when you reach the first shore of Ithaca,
send the ship and all the companions on to the city,
but yourself, before all else, go to the swineherd
who keeps your swine — whose heart is loyal to you all the same.

Sleep the night there;

and send him into the city
to carry the news to watchful-minded Penelope:

that you are safe, and have come home from Pylos."
So speaking, she went away to high Olympus.

And he woke Nestor's son out of his sweet sleep,
rousing him with a kick of his heel, and said to him:

"Wake up, Peisistratus, son of Nestor.

Bring out the strong-hoofed
horses and yoke them under the chariot, so we can be on our road."
Then Peisistratus, Nestor's son, answered him:

"Telemachus — however we press for the road, there is no
driving through the pitch-dark night.

And it will soon be dawn.

Wait, then, until the hero Atreus' son, Menelaus
famed for the spear, brings his gifts and sets them in the chariot
and sends us on our way with kindly words.

For a guest remembers, all his days,
the host who shows him kindness."
So he spoke;

and at once Dawn of the golden throne came on.

And Menelaus of the great war-cry came up to them,
fresh-risen from his bed, from beside fair-haired Helen.

When the dear son of Odysseus caught sight of him,
he hurried the shining tunic on about his body
and threw his great mantle over his sturdy shoulders —
the young hero — and went out;

and coming up beside him,
Telemachus, dear son of godlike Odysseus, said:

"Menelaus, son of Atreus, Zeus-nurtured, leader of peoples:

send me back now, at last, to my own dear fatherland,
for now my heart is longing to go home."
Then Menelaus of the great war-cry answered him:

"Telemachus — far be it from me to hold you here for long,
when you strain for home.