But Taphian pirates snatched me as I came in
from the fields, and carried me over the sea and sold me
to this man's house;

and he paid a worthy price.'
Then the man who had lain with her in secret said:

'Then would you come home again with us, to look on
the high-roofed house of your father and mother — and on them?

For they are living still, and are called wealthy.'
Then the woman answered him and said:

'Even that could be, if you sailors were willing
to bind yourselves by oath to bring me home unharmed.'
So she spoke, and they all swore the oath she demanded.

And when they had sworn and sealed the oath entire,
the woman spoke among them again and answered:

'Silence, now.

Let none of your company say a word
to me, meeting me in the street or at the well,
or someone may go to the house and tell the old man;

and he, suspecting, would bind me in hard bonds,
and set his mind on death for all of you.

Keep the word in your hearts, and press the buying of your cargo.

But when your ship is full and freighted with goods,
let a message come quickly to me at the house.

For I will bring gold too — whatever comes under my hand.

And there is another thing I would gladly give for my passage:

I nurse a child of this fine man in the halls —
such a knowing little thing, always running out beside me.

I would bring him aboard the ship, and he would fetch you
a boundless price, wherever you sell him among strange-tongued men.'
So speaking, she went off to the beautiful house.

And they stayed among us a whole year long,
and bought and gathered goods in their hollow ship;

and when the hollow hull was freighted for their crossing,
they sent a messenger up to bring the woman word.

A man came, deep in cunning, to my father's house
with a necklace of gold, strung here and there with amber.

And in the hall the slave-women and my honored mother
kept turning it in their hands and drinking it with their eyes,
offering him their price;

and he nodded to the woman in silence.

He nodded — then went his way to the hollow ship;

and she took me by the hand and led me out through the doors.

In the forecourt she found the cups and the tables
of the banqueters, the men who attended on my father:

they had gone out to the people's session and debate.

Quickly she hid three goblets away at her breast
and carried them off.

And I followed — in my child's witlessness.

The sun went down, and all the ways grew dark,
and we came at a run to the famous harbor,
where the sea-swift ship of the Phoenician men was lying.

Then they embarked, and went their way over the watery paths,
with the two of us aboard;

and Zeus sent down a wind.

Six days we sailed on, alike by day and night;

but when Zeus, the son of Cronos, brought the seventh day,
then Artemis the shooter of arrows struck the woman,
and she dropped with a thud into the bilge, like a sea-tern.

They heaved her overboard, spoil for the seals and fishes,
and I was left alone, my heart aching.

Then wind and water carried them along to Ithaca,
and there Laertes bought me, with his own possessions.

So it was my eyes first looked upon this land."
Then Odysseus, seed of Zeus, answered him with words:

"Eumaeus, you have deeply stirred the heart here in my breast,
telling all these things — the sorrows your heart has suffered.

And yet, I say, Zeus set the good beside the evil for you,
since after all that pain you came to the house of a kind
man, who provides your food and drink with every care,
and you live a good life — while I come to you here
as I am:

still wandering through the many cities of men."
So they spoke to each other of such things,
then lay down to sleep — no long time, a little only,
for soon Dawn came on her fair throne.