And on the shore
the companions of Telemachus were striking sail:

they took the mast down smartly and rowed her in to anchorage,
and threw the mooring-stones out, and made the stern-lines fast;

and they themselves stepped out into the breaking surf
and readied a meal, and mixed the sparkling wine.

And when they had put away desire for food and drink,
clear-headed Telemachus began and spoke among them:

"Row the black ship on now, all of you, to the city.

I will make my way to the fields and to the herdsmen,
and at evening, once I have looked over the farmlands, I will come down.

In the morning I will set before you the wages of the voyage:

a good feast of meats, and honey-hearted wine."
Then godlike Theoclymenus said to him:

"And where shall I go, dear child?

Whose house shall I come to,
of the men who hold power in rocky Ithaca?

Straight to your mother's house — is that where I go — and yours?"
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him:

"At any other time I would tell you:

come to our house —
there is no lack there of what a guest is given.

But for you, now,
it would be the worse way:

I will be gone, and my mother
will not see you.

For not often before the suitors in that house
does she appear:

apart from them she weaves at her loom, upstairs.

But I will name you another man you might go to:

Eurymachus, glorious son of thoughtful Polybus,
whom now the men of Ithaca look on like a god.

For he is far the best man there — and hungriest of all
to marry my mother and take the honor that was Odysseus'.

But Zeus the Olympian, who has his home in the bright sky,
knows whether before any wedding he will bring their evil day."
And even as he spoke, a bird flew by on his right hand:

a hawk, the swift messenger of Apollo.

In its talons
it held a dove, and was tearing it, and shook the feathers down
to the ground, midway between the ship and Telemachus himself.

And Theoclymenus called him apart from his companions,
and pressed his hand, and spoke a word, and named him:

"Telemachus, not without a god did that bird fly past on the right:

I knew it, looking at it face-on, for a bird of omen.

There is no line more kingly than your own
in the land of Ithaca.

No:

yours is the power forever."
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him:

"Ah, stranger, if only that word might be accomplished:

then you would quickly know my friendship, and gifts
in plenty from me — any man who met you would call you blessed."
And he turned and spoke to Piraeus, his trusted companion:

"Piraeus, son of Clytius — you who in other things obey me
most of all the companions who followed me to Pylos:

now too, I ask you, take this stranger to your house
and care for him kindly, and honor him, until I come."
Then Piraeus, famous for the spear, answered him:

"Telemachus, even if you should stay out there a long while,
I will look after this man;

no guest's due shall he lack."
So speaking, he went aboard the ship, and called the companions
to come aboard themselves and loose the stern-lines;

and they came aboard at once and took their places at the oarlocks.

And Telemachus bound his beautiful sandals under his feet
and took his strong spear up from the deck of the ship,
sharp-tipped with bronze.

And the men cast off the stern-lines:

they shoved out and sailed on to the city, as they were ordered
by Telemachus, dear son of godlike Odysseus.

But his feet carried him swiftly, striding, until he reached the yard
where his swine past counting were;

and beside them the swineherd
slept, a good man, whose heart was loyal to his masters.

---