and then the shining bowl was carried
by strong Megapenthes and set down there before him,
silver and bright;

and Helen of the beautiful cheeks stood beside him,
holding the robe in her hands, and she spoke a word and addressed him:

“I too, dear child, now give you this gift from my own keeping,
for a remembrance of Helen’s hands, against the longed-for day of marriage,
for your bride to wear;

till then let it lie with your dear mother
there in the hall.

And may you come with joy and reach your homeland,
both your well-built house and the soil of your fathers’ country.”
So she spoke and placed it into his hands, and he received it gladly.

Then the hero Peisistratus took the gifts and he placed them
in the chariot-basket, and marveled at all in his spirit.

Then fair-haired Menelaus led them both on into the house there,
and they sat down thereafter on chairs and on polished benches.

Then a handmaid poured water upon their hands from a pitcher,
fair and golden, holding it over a silver basin
for them to wash, and beside them she drew up a polished table.

Then the grave housekeeper brought bread and set it before them,
laying on many good things, giving freely out of the stored food;

and nearby Boethous’ son carved the meat and divided portions;

and the son of glorious Menelaus poured out the wine there.

Then to the good things set out and prepared they reached with their hands.

But when they had cast from them the desire for drink and for eating,
then indeed Telemachus and the glorious son of great Nestor
yoked the horses and climbed to the richly inlaid chariot,
and they drove from the forecourt and echoing colonnade outward.

And after them came forth the son of Atreus, fair-haired Menelaus,
holding within his right hand the honey-sweet wine for departure,
in a golden cup, so that they might pour and then be going.

And he stood in front of the horses, and giving them charge he addressed them:

“Farewell, young men, and give my greeting to Nestor, the shepherd
of the people;

for truly to me he was gentle as father
all through the time in Troy when we sons of Achaea made war there.”
Then in reply spoke to him clear-headed princely Telemachus:

“Surely indeed, Zeus-nurtured one, all this, just as you tell us,
we shall recount when we have arrived.

If only in this same manner,
coming back home to Ithaca, I might find Odysseus
there in the house, and tell him that I come from your presence,
having found every kindness, and bringing many fine treasures.”
Even as he was speaking, there flew by a bird on the right hand,
An eagle was bearing a monstrous white goose in his talons,
tame from the yard;

and after him men and women were crying.

Then, as he came in near to them, with the people behind him,
off to the right he swept, before the horses in passing.

Seeing the sign, they rejoiced, and the heart in the breast of each warmed there.

Then among them Peisistratus, Nestor’s son, started speaking:

“Consider now, Menelaus, dear child of Zeus, lord of the people,
whether the god has shown this portent to us two, or to you there.”
So he spoke, and war-loving Menelaus pondered within him
how he might answer him rightly, perceiving the due interpretation.

But before him long-robed Helen spoke out and addressed them:

“Hear me now;

and I shall prophesy as in my spirit
the immortals cast it, and as I think it will be fulfilled too.

Just as this eagle seized up the goose that was fattened in household,
coming down from the mountain, where his lineage and birthplace are,
so will Odysseus, after enduring much evil and wandering,
come home again and exact his revenge;

or perhaps even now he
is at home, and is planting destruction for all of the suitors.”
Then in answer to her spoke clear-headed Telemachus firmly: