For in terrible measure he mourns for his son who is absent,
and for his wise wedded wife, whose death beyond all things
struck him with grief and laid him low in harsh and pitiless old age.

She indeed perished in sorrowing after her glorious son there,
by a most wretched death;

may no one who here is my loved friend
die in such fashion, if he dwells here and shows me kindness.

So long as that lady still lived, though grieving unceasingly,
even so it was dear to my heart to inquire and to ask of her,
since she herself had reared me along with long-robed Ctimene,
her stately daughter, the youngest by far of the children she bore.

Along with her I was nourished, and she honored me little the less so.

But when the two of us both came to lovely youth's full measure,
then they gave her to Same in marriage and took countless gifts for her,
while me the lady herself, when she clothed me in mantle and tunic,
beautiful garments to wear, and gave me sandals under my feet there,
sent out to the farm;

and she loved me still more in her inmost heart.

But now I am deprived of all these things;

yet for me on my labor
blessed gods make increase in the work wherein I continue.

From that I have eaten and drunk and given to reverend persons.

But from my mistress now there is no kindly thing to be heard there,
neither a word nor a deed, since evil has fallen upon the household,
these overweening men;

and greatly the servants all miss it,
speaking before their mistress and learning of each thing that happens,
and eating and drinking, and after that carrying something away
out to the farm, such things as always gladden the spirit of bondmen.”
Then Odysseus of many devices answered him, saying:

“Ah, surely, Eumaeus, swineherd, while still but exceedingly little,
far indeed were you driven astray from your fatherland and your parents.

But come, tell me this, and recount it to me truly and clearly:

was the broad-wayed city of men laid waste and plundered,
where your father had dwelt and your honored mother beside him,
or were you all alone by your sheep or away by your cattle
when hostile men seized you and took you away in their vessels
to the house of this man here, and he paid them a worthy price for you?”
Then again the swineherd replied to him, the captain of people:

“Stranger, since truly you ask me these things and seek to inquire of them,
now in silence attend and take your delight, and drink of the wine there
sitting at ease.

These nights are beyond all telling in number.

There is a time for sleeping, and time to enjoy hearing a story;

there is no need for you to lie down before the due hour;

too much sleep tires.

And for the rest, whichever man's own heart and spirit command him,
let him go out and sleep;

and together with dawn as it appears there,
after breakfast let him go with our master's swine in attendance.

But we two, here in the hut, while drinking and sharing our supper,
shall take delight in each other's grievous sorrows and hardships,
calling them back;

for afterward a man finds pleasure in sufferings,
when a man has endured very much and has wandered through much sorrow.

This I will tell you now, the thing that you ask and inquire of.

There is an island called Syrie, if ever you have heard of it,
lying above Ortygia, there where the sun has its turnings.

It is not overpeopled so much, but the land itself is noble,
good for the grazing of cattle, good for sheep, rich in wine, rich in wheatfields.

Hunger does not ever come in among all the people there, nor any
other disease, that hateful thing, befalls unhappy mortals.

But whenever the tribes of men throughout the city grow old there,
then comes Apollo the silver-bowed, with Artemis beside him,
and with his gentle shafts he visits and quietly kills them.