“So now may Zeus establish it, the loud-thundering consort of Hera;

then even there I should pray to you just as though to a goddess.”
He spoke, and laid on the horses the lash;

and eagerly forward
swiftly they sped through the town and were straining away for the open.

All through the day they shook the yoke that they bore on both shoulders.

Then the sun went down, and all of the roadways were darkened.

They came to Pherae, to Diocles’ dwelling and household,
son of Ortilochus, whom Alpheus begot as his offspring.

There they slept for the night, and he set guest-gifts there before them.

When the young Dawn appeared with her rose-red fingers in morning,
then they yoked up the horses and mounted the patterned chariot,
drove from the gate and the porch with its far-echoing resonance onward.

He touched them with whip as he drove, and the pair flew on with no protest.

Soon thereafter they came to the steep-built citadel of Pylos.

Then Telemachus spoke to the son of Nestor beside him:

“Son of Nestor, how could you fulfill what I ask and have promised?

Truly we boast that we are guest-friends through all generations,
from our fathers’ affection, and also we both are age-fellows.

This very journey besides will bind our thoughts in more concord.

Do not drive me on past my ship, dear child of Zeus, but leave me
there, lest the old man detain me against my will in his household,
eager to give me affection;

but I must reach home very swiftly.”
So he spoke, and the son of Nestor considered within his own spirit
how he might best accomplish the thing that was promised, and rightly.

As he pondered, this course seemed to him far better and wiser:

turning the horses toward the swift ship and the beach of the seashore,
there in the stern of the ship he set down the beautiful presents,
clothing and gold, which Menelaus had given to Telemachus.

Then with urging he spoke to him and addressed him in winged words:

“Board now quickly yourself, and command all your comrades beside you,
before I get home and report to the old man all that has happened.

For I know this well in the depths of my heart and my thinking:

such is the force of his spirit, he certainly will not release you.

No, he will come here himself to summon you back, and I tell you
he will not go again empty;

he will be angry regardless.”
So he spoke, and drove back the fair-maned horses in haste to
the city of the Pylians, and quickly he came to the household.

Then Telemachus urged on his comrades and gave them his orders:

“Set in order the tackle, my friends, all throughout the black vessel;

let us ourselves embark, so we may accomplish our journey.”
So he spoke, and they listened attentively, and they obeyed him.

Straightway they boarded the ship and sat down upon all the benches.

He meanwhile busied himself, and prayed and sacrificed to Athena
there by the stern of the ship;

and near him there came up a stranger,
one from a distant land, fleeing from Argos for killing a man there,
a seer;

and by lineage he was descended from Melampus,
who in earlier times had lived in Pylos, mother of sheepflocks,
rich among all the Pylians, dwelling in splendid abundance.

But thereafter he came to another folk, fleeing his fatherland
and great-hearted Neleus, the proudest by far of men living,
who by force was retaining his wealth for a full turning year then.

Meanwhile in Phylacus’ halls that man remained all the while bound
fast in grievous confinement, enduring harsh anguish and suffering,
all for the sake of Neleus’ daughter and blinding delusion,
which on his spirit the dread house-haunting Fury had planted.