There are two cities there, and all things have been divided between them;

and over both of the cities my own dear father was reigning,
Ctesius, son of Ormenus, a man like the deathless immortals.

There came Phoenician men to that place, men famous for shipcraft,
cheats and tricksters, bringing innumerable trinkets in a black ship.

In the house of my father there was a Phoenician woman,
beautiful, tall, and skilled in splendid work with her hands.

Her the Phoenicians, masters of many deceits, led astray there.

While she was washing clothes by the hollow ship, one of them first
lay down with her in love;

and that thing confuses the spirit
even in women, and even one who is diligent in labor.

Then after this he asked her who she was and whence she had come there.

She at once pointed out the high-roofed house of my father:

“I declare that I come from Sidon, rich in bronze and abundance,
and I am daughter of Arybas, a man who is wealthy beyond measure.

But Taphian men, pirates and raiders, seized hold of me
as I came from the fields, and brought me over the water hither
to this man's house and home;

and he gave a fitting price for me.”
Then the man who had secretly lain with her answered her saying:

“Would you indeed now come back home again in our company,
so that you may see your father's and mother's high-roofed dwelling,
and see them too?

For they still live and are called wealthy.”
Then in return the woman replied and answered him saying:

“Yes, that indeed could be, if only you sailors were willing
to bind yourselves under oath to carry me home without harm done.”
So she spoke, and all of them swore as she had commanded.

But when they had sworn it and brought the oath to fulfillment,
then among them again the woman spoke and answered them saying:

“Now keep silent, and let not one of the comrades among you
speak any word to me if he should meet me out in the roadway
or perhaps by the spring, lest someone go to the house and tell it
to the old man, and he in suspicion should bind me tightly
fast in a grievous bond, and devise destruction against you.

But hold this word in your hearts, and hurry the purchase of cargo.

Yet when at last your ship has become filled full of provisions,
then let a message come to me quickly there in the house-place.

For I will bring gold also, whatever may come to my hands then.

And I could gladly give another fare besides this as well:

I am nurse to the child of this lordly man here in the halls,
a shrewd little fellow indeed, who runs out of doors beside me.

I could bring him on board of the ship, and he for your profit
would fetch you a price beyond measure wherever you reach alien peoples.”
So she spoke, and after speaking went away to the beautiful dwelling.

They, remaining there among us for the full course of a year then,
traded in many goods and amassed much wealth in their hollow ship.

But when at last their hollow ship was laden to sail homeward,
then indeed they sent a messenger, one to inform the woman.

There came a man to the house of my father, skilled in many wiles,
carrying a golden necklace inlaid with bits of amber.

There in the hall the serving-women and my honored mother
handled it over and over in their hands and gazed with their eyes on it,
offering a price;

and he nodded in silence to the woman.

Then after making the sign he had gone away to the hollow ship,
and she took me by the hand and led me out from the house-doors.

There in the forecourt she found both cups and tables together
left by the men at the feast who attended around my father.

They had gone away to the meeting-seats and the talk of the people.

Quickly she hid three fine cups in the fold of her bosom
and carried them out;

and I followed with childish unknowing.