And the sun sank down, and all the roadways were shadowed.

Then the ship made for Pheae, driven hard by the wind of Zeus there,
and past shining Elis, where the Epeians hold their dominion.

From there again he drove her on toward the outlying islands,
pondering whether he might escape from death, or be taken.

Meanwhile within the hut sat Odysseus and the noble swineherd,
taking supper;

and beside them the other men supped as well there.

But when they had put from them the desire of drink and of eating,
then Odysseus spoke among them, to test the swineherd's spirit,
whether he still would kindly invite him to stay and remain there
in the farmstead itself, or else would urge him cityward onward:

“Hear me now, Eumaeus, and all the rest of my comrades.

At dawn I desire to go toward the city and beg there,
so that I may not wear you down and burden your companions.

But advise me well, and furnish a noble guide to go with me,
one who will lead me there;

and then through the town by necessity
I myself will wander, if anyone offers a cup and a morsel.

And going then to the house of godlike lord Odysseus,
I might tell my tidings to circumspect wise Penelope,
and I might mix with the proud and overbearing suitors,
if they would give me a meal, with countless good things in abundance.

Quickly and well I would do among them whatever they wished done.

For I will tell you this, and do you attend and listen:

by grace of Hermes the guide, who upon the endeavors
of all mortal men bestows both favor and glory in labor,
No other mortal in service with me could contend or dispute there,
whether in kindling a fire with skill or in cleaving dry firewood,
carving the meat and roasting it well and pouring the wine out,
all the such tasks that lesser men's hands run by for the noble.”
Then in great indignation you answered him, Eumaeus the swineherd:

“Ah me, stranger, what sort of a thought has arisen within you?

Surely you yearn altogether to perish there on the instant,
if indeed you desire to go down into that throng of the suitors,
whose outrage and violent force rise up to the iron heaven.

The serving-men there are not in the least of the sort that you are,
but they are young men, well clothed about in mantles and tunics,
always sleek in the hair, and their faces are handsome to look on:

these are the men who attend them;

and polished tables before them
heavily sag with bread and with meats and with wine in abundance.

No, but remain here;

for no one is vexed by your presence among us,
neither I nor any other companion of mine who is with me.

But when the dear son of Odysseus comes here among us,
he himself will put on you a mantle and tunic for clothing,
and will send you wherever your heart and spirit command you.”
Then resourceful Odysseus, who had endured much, answered him:

“Would that thus, Eumaeus, you might be dear to father Zeus's heart
as you are dear to mine, since you stopped my wandering and hardship.

For there is nothing for mortals more wretched than aimless wandering;

yet for the sake of the cursed belly men suffer afflictions,
any man whom wandering has reached, and calamity, sorrow, and anguish.

But now, since you urge me to stay here and await that young master,
come then, tell me now of the mother of godlike Odysseus,
and his father too, whom he left as he went on the threshold of old age:

are they still living somewhere beneath the beams of the sunlight,
or are they dead already and in the house of Hades?”
Then again the swineherd replied to him, the captain of people:

“Then, stranger, I certainly will tell you the whole truth exactly.

Laertes still is alive, but always he prays unto Zeus there
that the life in his limbs may waste away in his halls and be ended.