Then the sun sank down, and all of the streets were overshadowed.

We came very quickly, hurrying on, to the famous harbor,
where the swift seafaring ship of the Phoenician sailors was lying.

Then they embarked and sailed on over the watery pathways,
we two having gone on board;

and Zeus sent forth them a fair wind.

For six days alike we sailed both through the nights and the daytime.

But when at last the son of Cronos had brought the seventh day on,
then Artemis, delighting in arrows, struck down that woman,
and she fell with a thump in the bilge like a diving sea-gull.

Then they cast her away overboard, for seals and fishes to ravage.

they cast her out;

but I was left there, heart-sick in my affliction.

Then the wind and the water together bore them on to Ithaca,
where Laertes purchased me there with goods from his own keeping.

Thus it was I myself first saw this country here with my own eyes.”
Then resourceful Odysseus, born of Zeus, answered him, saying:

“Eumaeus, truly indeed you have stirred the heart in my bosom,
telling of each of these things, all the griefs your spirit has suffered.

Yet surely Zeus set some good thing beside this evil for you,
since after much hardship you came to the house of a gentle
man, one who provides you with food and with drink in abundance,
tenderly;

and you live a good life;

but I on the other hand,
after much roaming through cities of mortal men, have come here.”
Thus they in this fashion addressed one another with speeches,
and they lay down to sleep for no very long time, but briefly;

for quickly Dawn on her beautiful throne came over them.

On the mainland
the companions of Telemachus loosened the sails, and they lowered
the mast in haste, and with oars drew the ship on into the harbor;

out they cast mooring-stones, and fastened the stern-cables firmly;

and they themselves stepped out on the wash of the surf of the seashore,
and they made ready a meal, and mixed the flaming wine in the bowl there.

But when they had put from them the desire for drink and for eating,
then wise Telemachus there among them began with his speaking:

“Now drive the black ship onward, all of you, into the city;

but I shall go on to the fields and go to the herdsmen.

In the evening I shall come down to the town, when I have inspected
all my work;

and at dawn I shall set before you for your journey
a noble feast of meats and of sweet delightful wine there.”
Then godlike Theoclymenus answered and spoke to him, saying:

“But where shall I go, dear child?

To whose house shall I come now,
of the men who hold lordship throughout rugged Ithaca’s island?

Shall I go straight to your mother’s house, and to your own dwelling?”
Then wise Telemachus answered him directly and said this:

“At another time I surely would bid you go to our household;

for there is no lack of guest-gifts there;

but for you it is better
otherwise, since I shall be away, and my mother will not see you.

For she does not often appear in the house before the suitors;

rather apart from them in the upper room she weaves at her loom there.

But I shall point out another man to you, one you may visit:

Eurymachus, the splendid son of the prudent Polybus,
whom now the men of Ithaca look upon as if on a god there.

For he is by far the foremost man, and most greatly is eager
to marry my mother and take the honor of noble Odysseus.

Yet Zeus Olympian knows it, dwelling up in the bright aether,
whether for them before marriage he will accomplish an evil day.”
So he spoke, and there flew past on the right hand a bird of omen,
a hawk, swift messenger of Apollo;

within his talons
he held a dove, and he tore it, and scattered the feathers earthward
down to the ground between the ship and Telemachus himself there.