Yet even so he escaped his fate, and drove the loud-lowing cattle
out of Phylace to Pylos, and paid back the shameful transgression
done by godlike Neleus, and brought home the woman in marriage
for his brother;

but he himself went on to another people,
onward to horse-pasturing Argos;

for there it had been his destiny
there to dwell and to rule as lord over many Argives.

There he took him a wife and established a high-roofed dwelling,
and he begot Antiphates and Mantius, stalwart sons both.

Antiphates fathered Oicles, great-hearted in spirit,
and Oicles fathered Amphiaraus, driver of peoples,
him whom Zeus of the aegis loved in his inmost being,
and Apollo as well, with every manner of fondness;

yet he did not attain to the threshold of age, but perished
there in Thebes;

and sons were born to him, Alcmaeon, Amphilochus.

Mantius likewise begot Polyphides and also Cleitus;

but indeed gold-throned Dawn carried away noble Cleitus,
for the sake of his beauty, that he might dwell with immortals.

But high-hearted Polyphides Phoebus Apollo appointed
prophet by far the best among mortals, when Amphiaraus died.

He then moved and made home in Hyperesia, angered
there with his father;

and dwelling there he gave prophecies to all men.

Then it was this man's son who came near;

Theoclymenus
was the name that he bore;

and he stood by the side of Telemachus.

He found him pouring libation and making prayer by his swift black ship there,
and calling out to him he addressed him in winged words:

“Friend, since I have found you here in this place making sacrifice,
I beseech you by these offerings here, and then by the god there,
and by your own head too, and the heads of companions who follow:

tell me the truth in answer;

do not conceal it from me.

Who are you among men, and from where?

Where are your city and parents?”
Then thoughtful Telemachus answered him face to face, saying:

“Then, stranger, I certainly will tell you the strict truth clearly.

I am by race from Ithaca, and my father is Odysseus,
if indeed he once was;

but now he has perished in misery.

Therefore now, taking comrades with me and my black vessel,
I came to inquire of my father, so long departed.”
Then godlike Theoclymenus spoke in answer to him:

“So I too have come out from my fatherland, having killed a man,
one of my own blood;

and many his brothers and kinsmen
are throughout horse-pasturing Argos, and rule many Achaeans.

From these I am fleeing death and the black doom appointed,
since it is somehow my fate to wander abroad among mortals.

But let me embark on your ship, since I come as suppliant,
lest they kill me;

for I think they are pursuing behind me.”
Then thoughtful Telemachus answered him face to face, saying:

“No, I will certainly not drive you, willing, away from the good ship.

Come along;

and there you will be welcomed with what we can offer.”
So he spoke, and accepted from him the bronze-shod spear there,
and he stretched it out on the benches of the curved vessel.

Then he himself as well went aboard the seafaring ship there.

In the stern thereafter he sat himself down, and beside him
he seated Theoclymenus;

and the crew cast off the stern-cables.

Then Telemachus urged on his comrades and gave them commandment
to set hand to the gear;

and swiftly they moved in obedience.

Then they lifted the firwood mast within the hollow midship,
set it upright, and fastened it down with the forestays tightly;

then they hauled up the white sail with well-twisted thongs made of oxhide.

And for them gray-eyed Athena sent a wind from behind them,
strong-blowing, rushing hard through the bright clear air of heaven,
so the ship at full speed might accomplish the salt sea water.

Then they passed by Crouni and Chalcis with beautiful waters.