But to wide-dancing Lacedaemon went Pallas Athena,
seeking the splendid son of great-hearted Odysseus,
to remind him of homecoming and to urge his returning.

There she found Telemachus and Nestor’s glorious offspring
sleeping there in the forecourt of battle-famed Menelaus.

Nestor’s son in truth lay subdued by the softness of slumber;

but upon Telemachus sweet sleep did not settle, for inward
through the immortal night care for his father kept waking.

Standing close beside him then spoke the gray-eyed Athena:

“Telemachus, it is no longer well to wander far from your household,
leaving your treasures behind and men in your halls there,
men so arrogant, lest they consume and divide all your substance,
sharing your wealth among them, and your journey prove wasted.

Therefore urge with all speed Menelaus, good at the war-cry,
to send you away, so you still may find your blameless mother.

For already her father and brothers are urging upon her
marriage with Eurymachus, since he surpasses the others,
all the suitors, with gifts, and increases the bridal-presents.

See that none of your substance is carried away from the household
against your will;

for you know what the mind of a woman is like.

She is eager to prosper the house of the man who has married her,
and of her earlier children and wedded beloved husband,
once he is dead, she remembers no more and asks nothing.

But you, going yourself, must entrust all things in your household
to that one of the serving-women who seems to you best,
until such time as the gods make known your noble bedfellow.

Yet another thing will I tell you;

lay this up in your spirit.

Chosen men of the suitors are lying in ambush against you
in the strait between Ithaca and rugged Samos,
longing to kill you before you reach your fatherland’s country.

But I do not think it will be so;

before that, the earth shall
cover some suitor or other who feed on your living.

Keep your well-fashioned ship at a distance, away from the islands,
and keep sailing by night as well;

and one of the immortals
who guards you and saves you will send a fair wind from behind.

But whenever you come to the first shore of Ithaca,
send on the ship to the city, and all your companions with her,
while you yourself before all things go to the swineherd,
him who tends your swine and whose heart is kindly toward you.

There remain for the night;

then urge him to go to the city,
carrying news to prudent Penelope there in the household,
telling her that you are safe and have come back from Pylos.”
So having spoken, she departed away to far Olympus.

Then he awakened the son of Nestor from sweet sleep beside him,
moving him with his foot, with a kick, and he spoke these words to him:

“Wake now, Peisistratus, son of Nestor, and lead out the single-hoofed horses,
yoke them under the chariot, so we may make speed on the journey.”
Then in answer to him spoke Peisistratus, Nestor’s offspring:

“Telemachus, there is no way, though eager we are for the journey,
to drive through the murk of the night;

but soon there will be dawn-light.

Rather remain until Atreus’ son, the hero Menelaus,
famous with the spear, has brought out gifts and set them in the chariot,
and with gentle words has spoken and sent us forth on our journey.

For all his days a guest remembers ever thereafter
one who has shown him friendship and given him generous welcome.”
So he spoke, and at once came Dawn on her golden high throne-seat.

Then there came near to them Menelaus, good at the war-cry,
risen up from his bed, from the side of fair-haired Helen.

And when the dear son of Odysseus became aware of him,
hastily round his flesh he drew his gleaming tunic,
and cast a great cloak over the shoulders sturdy and broad of
the young prince, then went outside;