and standing close by him,
Telemachus, dear son of godlike Odysseus, addressed him:

“Son of Atreus, Menelaus, Zeus-nurtured shepherd of peoples,
send me away now at last to the land of my own dear fathers;

for already my heart within me longs to be going homeward.”
Then in answer to him spoke Menelaus, good at the war-cry:

“Telemachus, I for my part will not detain you much longer
here, when you are desiring return;

and I would blame another
host as well, who should cherish too much or else should hate too much.

Better are all things measured aright and held in due balance.

Just as bad is the man who urges away an unwilling
guest, as the man who restrains one who hastens and longs to be leaving.

One must love the guest while present, and send him when he is willing.

But remain until I set the gifts in the chariot after bringing
beautiful things, so your own eyes may see them, and I tell the women
to prepare in the hall a meal from the abundance within us.

This is at once both honor and shining grace and advantage,
when men have dined and then set out over the boundless broad earth-way.

But if you wish to be guided through Hellas and midmost Argos,
so that I may myself go with you, and I will yoke horses for you,
guiding you on through the cities of men;

and no one among them
will send us away with empty hands, but each will give something
for us to carry away, some tripod of well-burnished bronze there,
or some cauldron, or else a pair of mules, or a gold drinking-cup.”
Then in reply spoke to him clear-headed princely Telemachus:

“Menelaus, son of Atreus, Zeus-nurtured shepherd of peoples,
I desire now at once to go back home to our own country;

for when I came away, I left no guard there behind me
watching my property, lest while I seek my godlike father
I myself may perish, or some fine treasure be lost from my halls.”
But when war-shouting Menelaus had heard what he said there,
at once he gave command to his wife and the serving women
to prepare in the hall a meal from the abundance within them.

And near at hand there came Eteoneus, Boethous’ offspring,
rising up from his bed, since he lived not far from the house there;

him war-shouting Menelaus ordered then to kindle fire
and to roast cuts of meat;

and he obeyed when he had heard him.

But he himself went down to the fragrant treasure-chamber,
not all alone, for Helen went with him, and Megapenthes.

But when they had arrived where the precious treasures were lying,
then the son of Atreus lifted a cup with handles on both sides,
and he told his son Megapenthes to carry a mixing-bowl,
one made of silver;

and Helen stood beside the great coffers,
where the robes lay for her, all richly embroidered, her own work.

Then Helen, shining among women, lifted one of these from them,
that one which was loveliest in figured design and the largest;

and it shone like a star;

it was laid beneath all of the others.

Then they set out and went back through the house, until they reached
Telemachus;

and fair-haired Menelaus spoke to him, saying:

“Telemachus, may Zeus bring to fulfillment your homecoming,
just as your own heart longs for it, the loud-thundering consort of Hera.

And of the gifts, whatever lie stored as treasures within my house here,
I will give what is fairest and held in the highest honor.

I will give you a skillfully wrought mixing-bowl;

it is silver
all of it, and with gold are the rims completed upon it;

and it is work of Hephaestus;

and the splendid hero Phaedimus,
king of the Sidonians, gave it, when in his own house
he gave me shelter returning;

and this I desire to bestow on you.”
So he spoke, and the hero son of Atreus placed in his hands there
the two-handled cup;