And Piraeus, famous for the spear, came near them,
leading his guest through the town to the assembly-place;

and Telemachus
did not stand off long from his guest, but went to him.

And Piraeus spoke to him first:

"Telemachus, send women to my house at once,
so I can send you back the gifts Menelaus gave you."
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him:

"Piraeus — we do not know yet how these matters will fall.

If the lordly suitors kill me in my halls
by treachery, and divide up all my father's goods,
I would rather you keep the gifts and have the joy of them
than any of those men.

But if I plant death and doom for them,
then bring them, glad, to my house — and glad I shall be."
So speaking, he led the travel-worn stranger home.

And when they reached the well-settled house,
they laid their mantles down on the couches and chairs
and stepped into the polished baths and bathed.

And when the slave-women had bathed them and rubbed them with oil,
and thrown about them fleecy cloaks and tunics,
they came out of the baths and sat down on the couches.

A handmaid brought water for their hands in a pitcher,
a beautiful golden one, and poured it over a silver basin
for them to wash, and drew up a polished table beside them.

The grave housekeeper brought bread and set it before them,
laying out delicacies in plenty, giving gladly of her store;

and his mother sat opposite, by the pillar of the hall,
leaning back in her chair, spinning fine threads of yarn.

And their hands went out to the good things spread before them.

But when they had put away desire for food and drink,
watchful-minded Penelope began to speak among them:

"Telemachus, I am going up to my upper room
to lie on the bed that has become a bed of groaning for me,
forever stained with my tears, since the day Odysseus
went with the sons of Atreus to Ilium.

And you have not brought yourself,
before the lordly suitors come back into this house,
to tell me plainly of your father's homecoming — if you heard anything."
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered her:

"Then I will tell you, mother, the truth of it.

We went to Pylos, and to Nestor, shepherd of the people;

and he received me in his high house
and gave me loving welcome, as a father would his son
come home at last from far away:

with such
kindness he tended me, he and his glorious sons.

But of enduring-hearted Odysseus, alive or dead,
he said he had heard nothing from anyone on earth.

He sent me on, with horses and a bolted chariot,
to Atreus' son, Menelaus famed for the spear.

There I saw Argive Helen, for whose sake
the Argives and the Trojans labored so much, by the gods' will.

And Menelaus of the great war-cry asked me at once
what need had brought me to shining Lacedaemon;

and I told him the whole truth of it.

And then he answered me with these words:

'Shame on them!

Truly in the bed of a strong-hearted man
they want to lie — the spineless creatures that they are!

As when a deer beds down her newborn suckling fawns
in the thicket-lair of a mighty lion,
and goes questing the spurs and grassy hollows,
grazing — and then the lion comes back to his own bed
and lets an ugly doom loose on them both:

so Odysseus will let an ugly doom loose on those men.

If only — father Zeus, Athena, Apollo!

—
the man he was long ago in strong-founded Lesbos,
when he rose on a challenge and wrestled Philomeleides
and threw him hard, and all the Achaeans cheered:

such as he was then, let that Odysseus close with the suitors:

quick would their fates be then, and bitter their weddings.

As for what you ask of me and beg me:

I will not
talk around it, swerving aside, and I will not deceive you.

What the unerring Old Man of the Sea told me,
not one word of it will I hide or cover from you.