"Sit still and eat, stranger, or take yourself elsewhere —
or for words like these the young men will drag you through the house
by hand or foot, and flay the skin from every part of you."
So he spoke;

but all the rest were angered beyond measure,
and one of the arrogant young men would say:

"Antinous — that was not well done, striking the luckless wanderer.

Doomed man!

— what if he should be some god come down from heaven?

And the gods do go about, in the likeness of strangers
from far countries, taking every shape, and move through the cities,
watching over the violence of men, and the good order they keep."
So the suitors spoke;

but he paid no heed to their words.

And Telemachus nursed a great grief swelling in his heart
for the striking of him;

yet he let no tear fall to the ground,
but only shook his head, silent, brooding evils deep in his heart.

And when watchful-minded Penelope heard of it —
the man struck in the hall — she said among her slave-women:

"So may Apollo the famed archer strike you, Antinous!"
And the housekeeper Eurynome added her word:

"If an end could only come in answer to our prayers,
not one of these men would live to see fair-throned Dawn."
Then watchful-minded Penelope answered her:

"Nurse, they are enemies all, for they all plot evil;

but Antinous most of all is like black doom itself.

Some luckless stranger wanders through the house
begging alms of the men — his poverty commands him —
and all the others filled his pouch and gave,
but that one struck him with a footstool at the base of the right shoulder."
So she spoke among her attendant slave-women,
sitting in her chamber.

And meanwhile noble Odysseus was at his meal.

And she called the noble swineherd to her side and said:

"Go, noble Eumaeus.

Tell the stranger to come here,
so I may greet him a little, and ask him
whether he has heard anything of enduring-hearted Odysseus,
or seen him with his eyes.

He looks a far-wandered man."
And you answered her, Eumaeus the swineherd:

"If only the Achaeans would keep silence for you, queen:

the things he tells would charm your very heart.

Three nights I had him, three days I kept him with me
in the hut — for I was the first he came to, running from a ship —
and even so he never finished the tale of his sufferings.

As a man gazes at a singer, who sings to mortals
lessons of longing that the gods have taught him,
and they ache to hear him on and on, as long as he will sing —
so that man cast his spell on me, sitting in my house.

And he says he is a guest-friend of Odysseus' father's line,
and lives in Crete, where the race of Minos is.

From there he has come here now, suffering hardship,
tumbled on and on;

and he swears he has heard of Odysseus
near, in the rich land of the Thesprotian men,
alive — and bringing treasures home in plenty."
Then watchful-minded Penelope answered him:

"Go, call him here, so he can tell it to my face.

And those men — let them sit at the doors and amuse themselves,
or here in the house, since their hearts are merry.

Their own possessions lie untouched at home,
bread and sweet wine:

their house-folk eat that,
while they crowd our house day after day,
slaughtering our oxen and sheep and fat goats,
feasting away and drinking the sparkling wine
recklessly.

The most of it is wasted.

For there is no man here,
such as Odysseus was, to ward ruin from the house.

But if Odysseus came — if he reached his own country —
quickly, with his son, he would repay these men their violence."
So she spoke;

and Telemachus sneezed — a great sneeze — and round about
the whole house rang terribly with it.

And Penelope laughed,
and quickly spoke winged words to Eumaeus:

"Go — please — and call the stranger here before me.

Do you not see how my son sneezed on all I said?