So may death be not unaccomplished for the suitors —
for every man of them;

not one shall slip out of death and the fates.

And another thing I will tell you:

lay it up in your heart.

If I find that everything he says is true,
I will dress him in a cloak and a tunic, fine clothing."
So she spoke;

and the swineherd went when he heard the word,
and standing close he spoke winged words:

"Stranger — father — watchful-minded Penelope is calling for you,
the mother of Telemachus.

Her heart bids her ask
about her husband, for all the griefs she has borne.

And if she finds that everything you say is true,
she will dress you in a cloak and a tunic — the things you need
most of all.

And your bread you can beg through the town
and feed your belly;

whoever wishes will give to you."
Then much-enduring noble Odysseus answered him:

"Eumaeus, I would tell it all, truly, and at once,
to the daughter of Icarius, watchful-minded Penelope —
for I know about that man well:

we have taken up the same misery.

But I am afraid of this mob of hard suitors,
whose arrogance and violence reach the iron sky.

Just now, when that man hit me and gave me pain
as I went through the hall doing no harm at all,
neither Telemachus nor any other man stepped in.

So tell Penelope to wait in the halls,
however eager, until the sun goes down;

and then let her ask me about her husband's day of homecoming,
giving me a seat closer to the fire:

for the clothes
I wear are miserable.

You know it yourself — I begged you first of all."
So he spoke;

and the swineherd went when he heard the word.

And as he crossed the threshold Penelope said:

"You do not bring him, Eumaeus?

What has the wanderer in mind?

Is he too much afraid of someone?

Or shy for some other cause,
here in the house?

A shy man makes a bad beggar."
And you answered her, Eumaeus the swineherd:

"He speaks as is right — as anyone would judge who thought it through —
wanting to keep clear of the insolence of these overbearing men.

He asks you to wait until the sun goes down.

And for you too, queen, it is far the better way:

to speak your word to the stranger alone, and hear him alone."
Then watchful-minded Penelope answered him:

"The stranger is no fool.

He guesses what could happen:

for I think there are no men anywhere, none among mortals,
who plot such reckless evil in their insolence."
So she spoke her say;

and the noble swineherd went off
into the crowd of the suitors, when he had told her everything,
and at once he spoke winged words to Telemachus,
leaning his head close, so the others would not hear:

"Friend, I am going back, to watch the swine and all that is there —
your living and mine.

And everything here — let it be your care.

Keep yourself safe first of all, and be watchful at heart
that nothing happens to you.

Many of the Achaeans think evil —
may Zeus wipe them out before harm comes to us!"
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him:

"So be it, old father.

Go when you have had your evening meal;

and in the morning come again, and bring fine beasts for slaughter.

All the rest shall be my care, and the deathless ones'."
So he spoke;

and the other sat down again on the polished stool,
and when he had filled his heart with food and drink,
he went his way to his swine, and left the walls and the hall
full of banqueters;

and they were delighting in dance and song,
for already the day had come on to evening.

---