the smell of roasting rises, and the lyre
is ringing there, which the gods made companion to the feast."
And you answered him, Eumaeus the swineherd:

"Easily known — you, who are not slow-witted in anything else.

But come, let us think how these things are to go.

Either you go first into the well-settled house
and slip in among the suitors, and I stay behind here;

or, if you like, you wait, and I go on ahead.

But do not linger long, or someone may see you outside
and throw something, or strike you.

Think on it, I say."
Then much-enduring noble Odysseus answered him:

"I know.

I understand.

You order a man who is thinking it too.

You go on ahead;

I will stay behind here.

I am not unacquainted with blows and peltings:

my heart is a patient one — I have suffered much evil
from waves and from war.

Let this be added to the rest.

But a ravening belly there is no hiding away,
that accursed thing, which gives so many evils to men;

for its sake even the well-benched ships are rigged
to cross the barren sea, bearing evil to enemies."
So they spoke to one another of such things.

And a dog lying there lifted his head and ears:

Argus, the dog of enduring-hearted Odysseus, whom once he
raised himself — and had no joy of him:

too soon he was gone
to holy Ilium.

In the old days the young men took him
out after wild goats, and roe deer, and hares;

now he lay neglected, his master gone away,
on the deep pile of dung that the mules and cattle
dropped in heaps before the doors, until Odysseus' slaves
could cart it off to manure his great estate.

There lay the dog Argus, covered with dog-ticks.

And now, as he sensed Odysseus near him,
he wagged his tail, and laid both his ears back flat,
but no longer had the strength to come any closer
to his master.

And Odysseus, glancing aside, wiped away a tear —
easily hidden from Eumaeus — and at once he questioned him:

"Eumaeus — a strange thing:

this dog lying on the dung-heap.

His frame is beautiful;

though this I cannot tell for certain:

whether he had speed to run to match this beauty,
or was merely one of those table-dogs men keep,
the kind their masters tend for show alone."
And you answered him, Eumaeus the swineherd:

"Only too true:

this is the dog of a man who died far away.

If he were now in form and action such
as Odysseus left him, going away to Troy,
you would stare at the speed and strength of him.

Nothing escaped him in the deep places of the wood,
no game he chased:

he was surest of all on a trail.

Now he is in a bad way:

his master has perished
far from home, and the women are careless and give him no tending.

Slaves — when their masters lose the upper hand,
they will no longer do their work as it should be done:

for Zeus of the wide voice takes half the worth away
from a man, the day the day of slavery seizes him."
So speaking he entered the well-settled house
and went straight down the hall among the haughty suitors.

But Argus — the doom of black death took him
the moment he had seen Odysseus, in the twentieth year.

And godlike Telemachus was far the first to see
the swineherd coming down the house;

and quickly then
he nodded, calling him over.

Glancing about, he took a stool
that lay there, where the carver would sit
while carving meat in plenty for the suitors feasting through the house;

this he carried and set at Telemachus' table,
opposite him, and sat down on it himself.

And a herald
took up a portion and set it before him, with bread lifted from the basket.

And close behind him Odysseus entered the house
in the likeness of a beggar, wretched and old,
leaning on a stick, with miserable clothing on his body.