But all the others gave, and they filled the pouch
with bread and meat.

And soon Odysseus was to go
back to the threshold, to taste the Achaeans' free bounty;

but he stopped beside Antinous, and spoke a word to him:

"Give, friend.

You do not look to me the meanest of the Achaeans —
no, the noblest of them:

you have the look of a king.

So it is right that you should give even better than the others —
bread;

and I would spread your fame over the boundless earth.

For I too once lived in a house among men,
a fortunate man in a wealthy one, and I often gave to a wanderer,
whoever he might be and whatever need he came in.

Slaves I had past counting, and everything in plenty
by which men live well and get the name of rich.

But Zeus the son of Cronos stripped it all — such, no doubt, was his will —
he who sent me out with roving pirates
to Egypt, a long road, to be destroyed there.

And in the river of Egypt I moored my curved ships.

Then, you may be sure, I ordered my trusted companions
to stay there by the ships and guard the ships,
and I sent out scouts to the lookout places.

But they gave way to arrogance — followed their own force —
and straightway began to pillage the beautiful fields
of the Egyptian men:

they carried off the women and small children,
and killed the men.

And quickly the cry reached the city.

Hearing the shout, at the showing of dawn the people
came;

and the whole plain filled with infantry and horses
and the lightning of bronze.

And Zeus who delights in thunder
threw an evil panic on my companions, and no man dared
stand and face it:

for destruction ringed us everywhere.

There they killed many of us with the sharp bronze,
and others they led up alive, to slave for them by force.

But me they gave to a guest-friend who met them there, for Cyprus —
Dmetor, Iasus' son, who ruled Cyprus by his strength.

From there I have come here now, suffering hardship."
Then Antinous answered him and raised his voice:

"What god has brought this plague here to sour the feast?

Stand off there, in the middle, away from my table,
or you may come soon to a bitter Egypt and a bitter Cyprus —
a bold and shameless beggar you are!

You stand by every man in turn, and they give
recklessly:

there is no holding back, no scruple
in being generous with other men's goods — each has plenty at hand."
Then Odysseus of the many designs drew back and said:

"Well, well.

So the wits in you are no match for the looks!

You would not give so much as a grain of salt from your own stores,
you who sit now at another man's table and cannot
bring yourself to take of the bread and give it — and plenty is at hand."
So he spoke;

and Antinous grew the angrier at heart,
and glaring from under his brows he spoke winged words:

"Now I do not think you leave this hall so prettily
after all — not now you take to insults too."
With that he seized the footstool and threw it, and struck the right shoulder
low, at the base of the back.

And he stood like rock,
steady:

the cast of Antinous did not stagger him.

He only shook his head, silent, brooding evils deep in his heart.

Then he went back to the threshold and sat, and laid down
the well-filled pouch, and spoke out among the suitors:

"Hear me, you suitors of the far-famed queen,
while I say what the heart in my breast commands.

There is no grief in the mind, no sorrow worth the name,
when a man is struck fighting for his own possessions,
for his cattle, say, or his silver-white sheep.

But Antinous struck me for my wretched belly's sake,
that accursed thing, which gives so many evils to men.

If anywhere there are gods and Furies for beggars,
may death's end find Antinous before any wedding."
Then Antinous answered him, Eupeithes' son: