But when, making their way down the rugged road,
they were near the town, and came to the fountain,
well-built, fair-flowing, where the people of the town drew water —
made by Ithacus and Neritus and Polyctor;

around it stood a grove of water-nourished poplars,
circling it on every side, and the cold water ran down
from the rock above;

and on top an altar was built
to the nymphs, where all wayfarers made their offerings —
there Melanthius the son of Dolius overtook them,
driving his goats, the ones that stood out in all the herds,
a dinner for the suitors;

and two herdsmen followed with him.

Seeing the pair he broke out against them — named them
in words beyond all bounds, indecent — and it stirred Odysseus' heart:

"Now here is the vile leading the vile, no mistake —
as ever, the god is bringing like and like together!

Where are you taking that glutton, you pitiful swineherd,
that beggar-pest, that licker of feast-plates?

He is the sort to stand rubbing his shoulders on many doorposts,
whining for scraps — not for swords and cauldrons.

Give him to me, to keep watch over my farmstead,
to sweep the pens and carry green shoots to the kids —
and drinking whey he might put some meat on that thigh.

But no:

he has learned bad ways, and he will not
set himself to work;

he would rather cringe through the town
begging, to feed that bottomless belly of his.

But I will tell you this, and it will be accomplished:

if he comes to the house of godlike Odysseus,
many the footstools flying round his head from men's hands
that his ribs will wear away with, pelted through the house."
So he spoke;

and passing, the fool, he lashed out a heel
at his hip — yet did not knock him off the path:

he stood there, steady.

And Odysseus weighed it —
whether to spring after him and take his life with the stick,
or lift him by the middle and dash his head against the ground.

But he mastered himself, and held it in.

And the swineherd
rebuked the man to his face, and lifting his hands prayed aloud:

"Nymphs of the spring, daughters of Zeus — if ever Odysseus
burned thigh-pieces for you, wrapped in rich fat,
of lambs or of kids, grant me this my prayer:

that the man himself come back, and a god guide him home.

He would scatter all those airs of yours,
every one — that you now wear so insolently, forever drifting
around the town, while bad herdsmen ruin the flocks."
Then Melanthius the goatherd answered him:

"Well, well!

How the cur talks — nothing but mischief in him!

One day I will take him on a black well-benched ship
far from Ithaca, where he could fetch me a good living.

If only Apollo of the silver bow would strike Telemachus
today in the halls, or the suitors bring him down,
as surely as for Odysseus, far away, the day of homecoming is dead!"
So speaking he left them there, walking slowly on,
and strode off, and came very quickly to the master's house.

He went straight in and sat down among the suitors,
opposite Eurymachus:

for him he loved best of all.

The serving-men set a portion of meat beside him,
and the grave housekeeper brought bread and set it by him
to eat.

And meanwhile Odysseus and the noble swineherd
came up close and stopped;

and around them came the ringing
of the hollow lyre:

for Phemius was striking up
his song among them.

And Odysseus took the swineherd's hand and said:

"Eumaeus — surely this is the beautiful house of Odysseus.

Easy it is to know it, to pick out at a glance among many.

One part is joined to another;

the courtyard is finished
with wall and coping;

the double doors are strong
and well-fenced.

No man could storm it with contempt.

And I can tell that a crowd of men is feasting
in it: