When Dawn appeared, the early-born, with fingers of rose,
then Telemachus bound the beautiful sandals under his feet —
Telemachus, dear son of godlike Odysseus —
and took his strong spear, which fitted his palm well,
straining toward the city;

and he spoke to his swineherd:

"Old father, I am off to the town, so my mother
may see me.

I do not think she will leave off
her hateful weeping and her tearful mourning before
she sees me in the flesh.

And this is my charge to you:

take this luckless stranger to the city, so there
he can beg his dinner;

whoever wishes will give him
a crust and a cupful.

I cannot carry every man
who comes, not I — I have griefs enough at heart.

And if the stranger takes it hard, so much the worse
for him.

I like to say the truth of things straight out."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered him:

"Friend, I have no wish myself to be kept back here.

Better for a beggar to beg his dinner in the town
than in the fields;

whoever wishes will give to me.

I am no longer of an age for staying on at farmsteads,
obeying in everything the word of an overseer.

Go on, then.

This man will bring me, as you order,
as soon as I have warmed myself at the fire, and the sun's heat comes.

These clothes I have are terribly bad:

the morning frost
might be too much for me — and the town, you say, is far."
So he spoke;

and Telemachus went out through the farmstead,
stepping fast, planting evils for the suitors.

And when he reached the well-settled house,
he set his spear against a tall pillar, carrying it in,
and went inside himself, over the stone threshold.

And far the first to see him was the nurse Eurycleia,
spreading fleeces over the inlaid chairs;

with a burst of tears she came straight toward him, and around him
the other slave-women of enduring-hearted Odysseus
gathered, and kissed his head and shoulders, welcoming him.

And out of her chamber came watchful-minded Penelope,
like Artemis, or golden Aphrodite,
and threw her arms around her dear son, weeping,
and kissed his head, and both his beautiful eyes,
and sobbing spoke winged words to him:

"You have come, Telemachus — sweet light!

I told myself
I would never see you again, once you had gone by ship to Pylos —
secretly, against my will, for news of your dear father.

Come now, tell me over:

what sight of him did you meet?"
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered her:

"Mother mine, do not stir up weeping in me, nor rouse
the heart in my breast — I have just escaped sheer death.

No:

bathe, and take clean clothing for your body,
and go up to the upper room with your attendant women,
and vow to all the gods that you will offer perfect
hecatombs, if Zeus may some day accomplish works of requital.

And I will go to the assembly-place, to call in
a guest who followed with me as I traveled here.

I sent him on ahead with my godlike companions,
and told Piraeus to take him home with him
and care for him kindly, and honor him, until I come."
So he spoke;

and for her the word stayed wingless.

And she bathed, and took clean clothing for her body,
and vowed to all the gods that she would offer perfect
hecatombs, if Zeus might some day accomplish works of requital.

Then Telemachus went on out through the hall,
spear in hand;

two swift dogs followed with him,
and Athena poured a wondrous grace upon him.

All the people gazed at him in wonder as he came;

and around him the lordly suitors gathered,
speaking him fair, but brooding evils deep in their hearts.

He slipped away from their thick crowd
and went where Mentor sat, and Antiphus, and Halitherses,
who were his father's companions from the beginning,
and sat down there;

and they questioned him on everything.