He said he saw him on an island, in strong pain,
in the halls of the nymph Calypso, who holds him there
by force;

and he cannot come to his own fatherland,
for he has no ships at hand, no oars, no companions
to carry him over the broad back of the sea.'
So spoke Atreus' son, Menelaus famed for the spear.

That done, I came away;

and the deathless ones gave me
a breeze, and brought me quickly to my own dear country."
So he spoke, and stirred the heart in her breast.

And godlike Theoclymenus spoke among them too:

"Honored wife of Laertes' son Odysseus,
truly he does not know it plainly.

Mark my word:

I will prophesy to you exactly, and hide nothing.

Zeus be witness now, first of the gods, and this table of guest-right,
and this hearth of blameless Odysseus to which I have come:

Odysseus is already in his own dear country —
sitting still, or moving — learning of these evil doings,
and planting evil for all the suitors.

So clear was the bird of omen I marked
as I sat on the well-benched ship, and I cried it out to Telemachus."
Then watchful-minded Penelope answered him:

"Ah, stranger, if only that word might be accomplished:

then you would quickly know my friendship, and gifts
in plenty from me — any man who met you would call you blessed."
So they spoke to one another of such things.

But the suitors, in front of Odysseus' hall,
were amusing themselves with discus and javelin throws
on the leveled ground, insolent as ever, where they always played.

But when it was dinner-time, and the flocks came in
from the fields all around, led by the men who always led them,
then Medon spoke to them — for he of all the heralds
pleased them best, and was always by them at the feast:

"Young men — now that you have all delighted your hearts with games,
come toward the house, so we can lay the meal.

There is nothing the worse in a dinner taken on time."
So he spoke;

and they rose and went, and obeyed his word.

And when they reached the well-settled house,
they laid their mantles down on the couches and chairs
and slaughtered big sheep and fat goats,
slaughtered sleek hogs and a heifer of the herd,
making their meal ready.

And meanwhile from the country
Odysseus and the noble swineherd were stirring themselves
to go to the city;

and the swineherd began, a leader of men:

"Stranger — since you are set on going to the town
today, as my master ordered — though for myself
I would rather have left you here to guard the farmstead,
but him I respect and fear:

he might scold me
afterward, and a master's reproofs are hard to bear —
come then, let us be off:

the day is mostly
gone already, and toward evening you will feel the cold."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered him:

"I know.

I understand.

You order a man who is thinking it too.

Let us go, then — and you lead the whole way through.

And give me a staff to lean on, if you have one
cut anywhere, since you say the road is treacherous."
He spoke, and slung about his shoulders his beggar's pouch,
full of holes, hanging by a twisted cord,
and Eumaeus gave him a stick that suited him.

The two set out;

and the dogs and the herdsmen stayed
behind, guarding the farm.

And he led his master toward the city
in the likeness of a beggar, wretched and old,
leaning on a stick, with miserable clothing on his body.