and there rose a sound as of cattle crying.

Six days after that my trusted companions
feasted on the cattle of Helios they had driven off, the best of them;

but when Zeus the son of Cronos set the seventh day upon us,
then at last the wind fell from its raging squall,
and we boarded at once and stood out onto the wide sea,
stepping the mast and hauling up the white sails.

But when we had left the island behind, and no other
land showed anywhere — only sky and sea —
then the son of Cronos set a dark-blue cloud
over the hollow ship, and the deep went black beneath it.

And she ran on not much longer:

for all at once came the shrieking
West Wind, raging in a great squall,
and the storm-blast snapped both forestays of the mast:

the mast toppled backward, and all its tackle spilled
down into the bilge;

and in the stern of the ship the mast
struck the steersman's head, and crushed the bones of the skull
all together;

and like a diver he dropped
from the half-deck, and his proud life left his bones.

And Zeus thundered in the same instant, and hurled his bolt into the ship,
and she shivered stem to stern, struck by the bolt of Zeus,
and filled with the reek of sulfur;

and the men fell from the ship.

Like sea-crows around the black hull
they were carried off on the waves;

and the god took away their homecoming.

But I kept moving through the ship, until the surge
tore the sides loose from the keel, and the wave carried her stripped bare,
and snapped the mast off at the keel.

But over the mast
the backstay had been flung — a thing made of ox-hide;

with it I lashed the two together, keel and mast,
and settling myself on them, I was carried before the deadly winds.

Then indeed the West Wind fell from its raging squall,
but the South came fast in its place, bringing anguish to my heart:

that I should measure back my way to deadly Charybdis.

All night I was carried;

and with the rising sun
I came to Scylla's crag, and to dread Charybdis.

She was gulping down the salt water of the sea —
but I, swinging up high toward the tall fig tree,
caught it and clung there like a bat.

And there was no way
to plant my feet firm anywhere, no way to climb it:

the roots were far below, and the branches out of reach,
long and great boughs that shadowed Charybdis.

I clung there without slackening, until she should vomit back
the mast and keel again.

And to my longing, late,
they came:

at the hour when a man rises from the assembly for supper —
the judge of many quarrels among contending young men —
at that hour the timbers reappeared out of Charybdis.

I let go, feet and hands, from above,
and dropped with a crash into the water beyond the long timbers,
and settling on them, I rowed hard with my hands.

And Scylla — the father of men and gods did not let her
see me again:

I would not have slipped clear of sheer destruction.

From there I was carried nine days;

and on the tenth, in the black night,
the gods brought me near the island Ogygia, where Calypso
lives, she of the lovely braids, the dread goddess with a mortal's voice,
and she loved me and cared for me.

But why tell that tale over?

Only yesterday I told it in this house — to you
and to your strong wife.

And it is hateful to me
to tell a tale over again that has been told out plainly."

---