But when all the ship's provisions were spent,
and need drove them roaming after game —
fish, birds, whatever came to their dear hands —
with bent hooks, while hunger wore their bellies down,
then I went away up the island, to pray
to the gods, in hope one might show me a road home.

And when, crossing the island, I had left my companions behind,
I washed my hands where there was shelter from the wind
and prayed to all the gods who hold Olympus —
and they poured sweet sleep upon my eyelids.

And Eurylochus began his evil counsel to the companions:

'Hear my words, companions, for all your suffering.

All deaths are hateful to wretched mortals —
but to die of hunger, and meet doom that way, is the most pitiful.

Come then:

let us drive off the best of the cattle of Helios
and sacrifice them to the immortals who hold wide heaven.

And if we come to Ithaca, our fathers' land,
we will build at once a rich temple to Helios Hyperion
and set up in it fine offerings, many of them.

But if, in anger over his straight-horned cattle, he wills
to destroy our ship, and the other gods go with him —
I would rather gulp once at the wave and lose my life
than be starved slowly to death on a desert island.'
So spoke Eurylochus, and the other companions approved.

And at once they drove off the best of the cattle of Helios,
from close by — for not far from the dark-blue-prowed ship
the beautiful broad-browed crook-horned cattle were grazing —
and they stood around them and prayed to the gods,
plucking the tender leaves of a high-crowned oak:

for they had no white barley aboard the well-benched ship.

And when they had prayed, and cut the throats, and flayed,
they carved out the thigh-pieces and wrapped them deep in fat,
folding it double, and laid raw flesh upon them;

and they had no wine to pour over the blazing offerings,
so they made libation with water, and roasted all the entrails.

And when the thighs were burned through, and they had tasted the innards,
they carved up the rest and threaded it on spits.

Then it was that the deep sleep fled from my eyelids,
and I went down to the fast ship and the shore of the sea.

But as I came near the curved ship,
the sweet smell of the fat's smoke drifted all around me,
and I groaned aloud, and cried out to the deathless gods:

'Father Zeus, and you other blessed gods who are forever —
it was for my ruin, then, that you laid me down in that pitiless sleep,
while my companions, waiting, devised this monstrous thing.'
Swiftly the word came to Helios Hyperion:

long-robed Lampetie brought it — that we had killed his cattle.

And at once, with anger in his heart, he spoke among the immortals:

'Father Zeus, and you other blessed gods who are forever:

make them pay — the companions of Odysseus, Laertes' son —
who in their insolence have killed my cattle:

the cattle
I took my joy in, every day I climbed toward the starry heaven
and every day I turned from heaven back toward earth.

If they do not pay me a fitting price for the cattle,
I will go down into Hades and shine among the dead.'
Then Zeus who gathers the clouds answered him:

'Helios — you shine on among the immortals, surely,
and among mortal men across the grain-giving plowland;

and as for those men:

their fast ship I will soon strike
with the white lightning, and shatter it to splinters in the middle of the wine-dark sea.'
— This I heard afterward from fair-haired Calypso;

and she said she heard it herself from Hermes the guide.

—
Now when I had come down to the ship and the sea,
I went up and down and rebuked them, man by man;

but no remedy
could we find anywhere:

the cattle were dead already.

And soon the gods began to show forth portents among the men:

the hides crawled;

the meat on the spits was lowing,
the roasted and the raw;