Now when we had escaped the rocks, and dread Charybdis
and Scylla, we came quickly then to the god's
blameless island:

there were the beautiful broad-browed
cattle, and the many strong flocks, of Helios Hyperion.

And while I was still at sea, in the black ship,
I heard the lowing of cattle being folded
and the bleating of sheep;

and there fell upon my heart the word
of the blind seer, Theban Tiresias,
and of Circe of Aeaea, who charged me over and over
to shun the island of Helios, the delight of mortals.

Then, grieving at heart, I spoke among my companions:

'Hear my words, companions, for all your suffering,
so I may tell you the prophecies of Tiresias
and of Circe of Aeaea, who charged me over and over
to shun the island of Helios, the delight of mortals:

there, she said, is the most terrible evil waiting for us.

No — drive the black ship on, wide of the island.'
So I spoke, and their own hearts broke within them.

And at once Eurylochus answered me — with a hateful word:

'You are a hard one, Odysseus.

Your strength is beyond us;

your limbs
never tire.

Truly you are made of iron through and through —
you who will not let your companions, worn down with labor
and sleeplessness, set foot on land, where on this
sea-ringed island we might at last make ready a savory supper;

no — just as we are, through the fast-falling night, you order us
to wander, driven off the island, over the misted sea.

Out of the nights are born the hard winds,
the wreckers of ships.

How would a man escape sheer destruction
if somehow, suddenly, a squall of wind should come,
South Wind or hard-blowing West, which more than any others
smash ships to pieces — in despite of the gods our lords?

No:

for now let us yield to black night
and make our supper ready, staying by the fast ship;

at dawn we will board, and stand out onto the wide sea.'
So spoke Eurylochus, and the other companions approved.

And then I knew it:

some power was plotting evils —
and lifting my voice I spoke winged words to him:

'Eurylochus, you force my hand:

I am one man alone.

But come — every one of you swear me a strong oath:

if we find some herd of cattle or great flock
of sheep, let no man in his evil recklessness
kill one cow, one sheep.

No:

sit quiet
and eat the food immortal Circe gave.'
So I spoke, and they swore at once, as I demanded.

And when they had sworn, and made an end of the oath,
we moored the well-made ship in the hollow harbor
close by a spring of sweet water, and the companions went
ashore, and skillfully made their supper ready.

But when they had put away desire for food and drink,
they fell to weeping, remembering their dear companions
whom Scylla had snatched from the hollow ship and eaten;

and as they wept, a deep sleep came upon them.

But in the night's third watch, when the stars had crossed their height,
Zeus who gathers the clouds roused a raging wind against us
in a howling squall, and covered land and sea alike
with cloud;

and night rose up out of heaven.

When Dawn appeared, the early-born, with fingers of rose,
we dragged the ship up and made her fast in a hollow cave
where the nymphs had their fine dancing-floors and seats;

and then I called them all together, and said:

'Friends — there is food and drink in the fast ship:

let us keep our hands off these cattle, or we shall suffer for it.

These are the cattle and the strong flocks of a terrible god —
Helios, who sees all things and hears all things.'
So I spoke, and their proud hearts consented.

Then for a whole month the South Wind blew without let, and no other
wind rose after that, except the East and the South.

As long as the men had bread and red wine,
they kept their hands from the cattle:

they wanted to live.