Her voice, truly, is no more than a newborn puppy's,
but she herself is an evil monster:

no one
could look at her and rejoice — not a god, if a god should meet her.

Twelve feet she has, all of them dangling;

six necks, immensely long, and on each one
a hideous head, and in each three rows of teeth,
thick-set and crowded, full of black death.

Waist-deep she is sunk in the hollow of the cave,
but she holds her heads out of that terrible pit
and fishes there, quivering with hunger around the crag,
for dolphins and dogfish, and whatever bigger beast
she can seize, of the thousands deep-moaning Amphitrite pastures.

Past her no sailors yet can boast
to have fled unharmed with their ship:

with each head
she carries off a man, snatched from the dark-blue-prowed vessel.

The other crag is lower — you will see it, Odysseus —
close by the first:

a bowshot would carry across.

On it stands a great fig tree, dense in leaf,
and beneath it shining Charybdis gulps down the black water.

Three times a day she spouts it forth, three times she gulps it down —
terribly.

May you not chance to be there when she gulps:

no one could save you from that evil then — not the earth-shaker himself.

No:

keep close to Scylla's crag, and quickly
drive the ship past.

It is far better
to mourn six companions from your ship than all together.'
So she spoke, and I answered her and said:

'Come then, goddess — tell me this, and tell it true:

might I somehow slip out from under deadly Charybdis
and stand off the other, when she strikes at my companions?'
So I spoke, and she answered at once, shining among goddesses:

'Hard man!

So even now your heart is set on the works of war
and struggle.

Will you not yield even to the deathless gods?

She is not mortal — she is an immortal evil,
terrible, grim, savage, not to be fought.

There is no defense.

To flee her is the best courage.

For if you linger by the rock to arm yourself,
I fear she will dart out a second time and catch you
with all six heads, and take six men again.

No — row past with all your force, and call on Crataiis,
the mother of Scylla, who bore her, a plague on mortals:

she will stop her then from darting out again.

And you will come to the island Thrinacia.

There in plenty
graze the cattle of Helios, and his strong flocks:

seven herds of cattle, and as many fine flocks of sheep,
fifty in each.

No young are born to them,
and they never die away.

Goddesses are their shepherds,
nymphs of the lovely braids, Phaethusa and Lampetie,
whom shining Neaera bore to Helios Hyperion.

Their honored mother, when she had borne and reared them,
settled them far away, on the island Thrinacia,
to keep their father's sheep and his crook-horned cattle.

If you leave these unharmed, and keep your mind on homecoming,
then you may yet reach Ithaca, though you suffer evils;

but if you harm them, then I foretell destruction
for ship and companions.

And even if you yourself escape,
late you will come, and in evil case, all companions lost.'
So she spoke;

and at once Dawn of the golden throne came on.

Then she went away up the island, shining among goddesses,
and I went to the ship and roused my companions
to board in their turn and loose the stern-cables;

and they came aboard at once and took their places at the oarlocks,
and sitting in order they struck the gray salt water with their oars.

And for us, behind the dark-blue-prowed ship,
a following wind that filled the sail, a good companion,
was sent by Circe of the lovely braids, dread goddess with a mortal's voice.

So when we had seen to the tackle through the ship,
we sat, and the wind and the steersman held her on course.

Then, grieving at heart, I spoke among my companions: