There in the hut were Odysseus and noble swineherd,
making the morning meal at dawn, after kindling the firelight,
and they had sent out the swineherds along with the huddled swineherds;

round Telemachus meanwhile the sharp-barking dogs came fawning,
neither barked as he approached;

and noble Odysseus marked it,
noticing how the dogs fawned round, and the sound came of footsteps.

Quickly then he addressed Eumaeus with winged words, saying:

“Eumaeus, surely now some comrade of yours will be coming,
or some other familiar man, since the dogs do not bark here,
but they are fawning around him;

and I hear the thud of feet too.”
Not yet had the whole word been spoken, when there stood his dear son
there in the doorway;

the swineherd sprang up in amazement,
and from his hands fell down the vessels with which he was toiling,
mixing the flaming wine;

and he went straight toward his master,
kissed his head, and both of his beautiful radiant eyes there,
and both of his hands;

and a warm tear fell from his eyelids.

As when a father with love in his heart folds close his own dear son,
coming back from a distant land in the tenth returning year,
his only child, late-born, for whom he has suffered great anguish,
so then the noble swineherd embraced godlike Telemachus,
kissed him all over and round, like one who escaped from destruction,
and in his lamentation he spoke winged words and addressed him:

“You have come, Telemachus, sweet light of my eyes and my spirit.

I had said I would never behold you again, once you sailed to Pylos.

Come now, dear child, come inside, so that deep in my spirit
I may delight in the sight of you, come from elsewhere returning.

Not very often you come to the farm or visit the herdsmen,
but you remain in the town;

for so, it seems, your heart has preferred it,
gazing upon that ruinous crowd of the suitor-men there.”
Then in return wise Telemachus answered and spoke to him:

“It shall be so, old father;

for your sake I have come here now,
so I may see you with my eyes and hear from your speaking
whether my mother still remains in the halls, or whether already
some other man has married her, while Odysseus’ bed there
lies without sleepers and keeps only foul-spun webs of the spider.”
Then the swineherd replied to him, that captain of people:

“Surely indeed she remains there, enduring in patient spirit,
in your halls;

and always for her in unending affliction
nights and days alike are consumed while she sheds many tear-drops.”
So saying, he took from his hand the bronze-shining spearshaft;

then he himself went inward and crossed the threshold of stone there.

As he came toward the seat, his father Odysseus yielded;

but Telemachus checked him from the other side and called to him:

“Sit, stranger;

elsewhere in our own farmstead we shall find seating.

There is a man at hand who will set it in place for you promptly.”
So he spoke, and Odysseus went back and sat in his place then;

and underneath him the swineherd strewn green brushwood, and over
laid a fleece;

and there sat down the dear son of Odysseus.

Then the swineherd set before them platters of roasted meats there,
portions they had left over before from the meal of the past day;

quickly he brought and heaped up the bread in the wicker baskets,
and in an ivy-wood cup he mixed the honey-sweet wine there;

then he himself sat down opposite godlike Odysseus.

And to the good things prepared and set out they reached with their hands then.

But when they had cast from themselves the desire for eating and drinking,
then Telemachus spoke to the noble swineherd and asked him:

“Old father, from where has this stranger of yours come hither to us?

How did the sailors bring him to Ithaca?

Who did they claim they
were?