when resourceful Athena shall put this design in my inward heart,
I will give you a sign with my head, and you then, when you mark it,
all the war-gear that lies in the hall and belongs unto Ares,
lift and carry away and store in the nook of the high chamber,
every bit of it;

then if the suitors should ask and should miss them,
turn them aside with gentle words whenever they question:

“Out of the smoke I removed them, since now they no longer resembled
such as Odysseus left when he went away thence unto Troy-land,
but are begrimed, to the degree that the breath of the fire has reached them.

And besides, the son of Cronos has set this greater thought in me:

lest perhaps, when wine has inflamed you, you stir up contention
and wound one another, and bring disgrace on the feast and the wooing;

for iron itself by its own force draws and entices a man on.”
But for us two alone leave two swords and likewise two spears there,
and two shields of oxhide for us to take up in our hands then,
so that we may rush on them and master them once we have armed us;

after that Pallas Athena and Zeus of the counsels will daze them.

One thing more will I tell you, and do you lay it in your spirit:

if truly you are my son and are sprung from the blood that is ours here,
let no one thereafter hear that Odysseus is present indoors here,
let not Laertes know it, nor even the swineherd be told it,
nor any one else of the household, nor even Penelope learn it;

but let only you and I find out the temper of women,
and thereafter we might even test the men among all your servants,
learning where one of them honors us two and fears us within him,
and who has no care and dishonors you, noble though you are.”
Then his shining son in return made answer and spoke unto him:

“Father, indeed you will know my spirit hereafter, I think so;

for no weakness of mind and no folly possesses me, surely.

Yet I do not suppose that this plan will turn to advantage
for us both;

I bid you consider it well in your own spirit.

Long will you spend in going about and testing each person,
visiting each at his work, while they in the halls without trouble
raven and waste our substance with violence, sparing none of it.

Yet as for the women, I urge that you learn and distinguish them,
both the ones who dishonor you and the guiltless among them.

But the men on the farms I for my part should not wish that we test now,
rather let us leave that for later and suffer it afterward,
if indeed you truly know some sign from Zeus who carries the aegis.”
So in such words they spoke and addressed one another together.

Then the well-fashioned ship was now bearing in toward Ithaca,
she that brought Telemachus home from Pylos with all his companions.

When at last they had come inside the deep-bosomed harbor,
then they hauled the black ship up and ashore on the mainland,
and the high-hearted servants carried away all their armor,
and at once they conveyed the beautiful gifts to Clytius’ dwelling.

Then they sent on a herald ahead to the house of Odysseus,
bringing word to wise-hearted and wary-minded Penelope,
that Telemachus stayed in the fields, but ordered the vessel
now to sail on to the town, so the queen in her spirit
might not fear and let the tender tear run down from her eyelids.

There the herald and noble swineherd encountered each other,
both on the selfsame errand, to speak to the woman and tell her.

But when they came to the house of the godlike king there,
then the herald spoke out in the midst of the serving-women:

“Now indeed, my queen, your beloved son has come to you homeward.”
But the swineherd, standing near, spoke then to Penelope,
all that her own dear son had commanded that he should tell her.