So has the son of Cronos made thin our line and diminished it:

Arceisius fathered Laertes, an only son only;

and Laertes’ son was Odysseus, born as an only son likewise;

and Odysseus fathered only me in the halls, and he had no joy of me.

Therefore the house is full of foes beyond all counting against me.

For all the nobles who hold lordship over the islands,
over Dulichium and Same and wooded Zacynthus,
and all who rule as lords throughout rocky Ithaca,
all these are wooing my mother and wearing away at the household.

She neither refuses the hateful marriage nor can she bring matters
to an end;

and they keep consuming and wasting away my possessions.

Soon enough they will rend me apart and destroy me as well here.

But surely indeed these things lie still on the knees of the deathless.

Come, old friend, go quickly and tell discreet Penelope
that I am safe for her and have returned from sandy Pylos.

I myself will remain here;

but you must come back to this place here
after reporting to her alone;

let none of the other Achaeans
learn it, since many indeed are devising destruction against me.”
Then in answer to him you spoke, Eumaeus the swineherd:

“I know it, I understand;

you command one who thinks on these matters.

But come now, tell me this and recount it exactly and truly:

should I go on the same road and carry the message to Laertes,
miserable man, who before, though grieving sore for Odysseus,
still used to oversee the work with the slaves on his farmland,
and to eat and to drink in the house, when the spirit within him should prompt him?

But now, from the day that you went with the ship on your way to Pylos,
they say that he no longer eats and drinks in the old way,
nor looks to the work of the fields, but with moaning and bitter lamenting
sits there and mourns, and the flesh all wastes from around his bones there.”
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered and spoke to him thuswise:

“More painful indeed;

but even so, though we grieve, we will leave him.

For if all things whatever could come by the choosing of mortals,
first of all we would choose the day of my father’s returning.

No, but go with the message, then turn yourself back;

do not wander
over the fields in search of him;

but say to my mother
that she should urge the housekeeper handmaid to go with all quickness,
secretly;

she indeed could carry the news to the old man.”
So he spoke and stirred up the swineherd;

he took in his hands then
both of his sandals, and bound them beneath his feet, and went cityward.

Neither
did it escape Athena that gone from the farm was Eumaeus
but she herself came near;

and in bodily form she resembled
a woman beautiful, tall, and well skilled in glorious handwork.

There by the doorway she stood at the hut, made visible to Odysseus.

Yet Telemachus did not see her before him nor notice;

for not to all men alike do the gods show plainly their presence.

But Odysseus saw her, and so did the dogs, yet they did not bark there,
but with frightened whimpering shrank to the far side of the farmyard.

Then with her brows she signaled;

resourceful Odysseus perceived it,
and he came out of the hall, passing the high wall of the courtyard,
and stood there facing her;

then Athena spoke and addressed him:

“Son of Laertes, seed of Zeus, Odysseus of many devices,
now at this moment speak to your son and no longer conceal it,
so that, when you have fixed doom and death for the suitors upon them,
you may go to the famed-walled town;

and I myself will not linger
long away from you both, for my heart is eager for battle.”
So she spoke, and Athena then touched him there with her golden wand.