For I do not suppose that he came to this place here on foot.”
Then you in answer addressed him, Eumaeus the swineherd:

“Therefore, my child, I shall tell you the whole truth of the matter.

He declares that his stock is from spacious dancing-grounded Crete-land,
and he says he has wandered through many the cities of mortals,
driven astray;

for thus has some god spun the thread of it for him.

Now having fled from a ship of the Thesprotian fighting men yonder,
he has come to my farmstead, and I place him now in your keeping.

Do as you will;

for he claims and declares he is your suppliant.”
Then in return wise Telemachus answered and spoke to him:

“Eumaeus, surely this word that you spoke is painful and heartfelt.

How in the world shall I welcome this stranger into my dwelling?

I am still young myself, and not yet do I trust in my hand-strength
to defend any man, when another begins with aggression.

And in my mother the spirit within her breast is divided,
whether to stay here beside me and keep the house in good order,
revering her husband’s bed and the voice of the people about her,
or else by now to go with whatever Achaean is noblest,
one who woos in the halls and offers the greatest bride-gifts.

Yet for this stranger, since he has come to your house as a comer,
I shall give him a cloak and a tunic, fine beautiful clothing,
and I shall give him a two-edged sword and sandals for his footsoles,
and I will send him wherever his heart and his spirit may bid him.

But if you wish it, keep him here, giving him care at the farmstead;

here I will send him clothing and all of the food that is needful
for him to eat, so he may not wear you away and your comrades.

But I for my part would not let him go there among suitors;

far too reckless indeed is the violent outrage they harbor.

They would make him their mock, and for me it would be a great heartache.

Hard is the task for one man to accomplish a thing against many,
though he be strong;

for indeed they are men of much greater power.”
Then in answer to him spoke much-enduring noble Odysseus:

“Dear friend, since now it is right that I also should make you an answer,
truly my own dear heart is gnawed away here as I listen,
hearing the things you tell of the suitors’ reckless contrivings
there in the halls, against your will, though you are such a man as this one.

Tell me whether you bow beneath them by choice, or whether the people
hate you throughout the land, as they follow a god’s declaration,
or whether you blame your brothers, on whom a man may rely still
there in the clash of battle, even if great strife should arise there.

If only I were so young, with this spirit here in my bosom,
or were a son of blameless Odysseus, or else were Odysseus himself;

then may some stranger at once strike the head from me and cut it away off,
if I did not become a bane to the whole of that company, all of them,
going into the hall of Odysseus, son of Laertes.

And if they by their numbers subdued me, being all alone there,
I would choose rather, struck down in my own halls, to meet death,
than forever keep seeing these shameful deeds before my eyes there,
guests being brutally mauled, and the female servants dragged by force
shamefully all through the rooms of the beautiful house and the chambers,
and the wine being drained and squandered, and men eating the food there
vainly and without end, for a thing that will never be finished.”
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered and spoke to him thuswise:

“Therefore, stranger, I now will tell you the truth of the matter.

It is not that the whole of the people hates me and bears me resentment,
nor am I blaming brothers, on whom a man may rely still
there in the clash of battle, even if great strife should arise there.