Then Amphinomus rose to address them and answer among them,
glorious son of Nisus, descended from lord Aretias,
who from Dulichium rich in wheat and abundant in meadow
led the suitors, and most of them all he was pleasing to her there,
to Penelope, by his words, for he had a well-meaning spirit.

Thinking good for them all, he rose and spoke in their gathering:

“Friends, for my part I would not be willing to slaughter
brave Telemachus;

dreadful it is to kill the blood of a ruler.

Slaying him;

yet first let us ask for the counsels of heaven.

If the decrees of great Zeus give praise and assent to the killing,
I myself will kill him, and urge all the others to help me;

but if the gods turn us back, I command you to stop.”
So spoke Amphinomus, and his counsel was pleasing among them.

Then at once they arose and went to the house of Odysseus,
and when they had entered they sat on the polished chairs there.

Then resourceful Penelope pondered another intention:

to appear to the suitors, those men of arrogant outrage.

For she had heard in the halls of the murder designed for her dear son;

for the herald Medon had told her, who heard their devising.

Then she went on her way to the hall with her women attendants.

But when among suitors the godlike queen of women had come there,
she stood by the pillar that held the close-fitted roof of the chamber,
lifting her shining veil and holding it there by her fair cheeks,
and she rebuked Antinous, spoke, and addressed him directly:

“Antinous, full of outrage, deviser of evil and cunning,
they say in the land of Ithaca, there with the men of your own age,
you are the best in counsel and speech;

but you were not such a man.

Reckless one, why are you weaving death and destruction for Telemachus,
and why do you not care for suppliants, over whom lord Zeus
stands as witness?

It is not holy to weave evil against one another.

Do you not know when your own father came here as a fugitive,
fearing the people?

For bitterly angry indeed they had grown then,
because he had joined the Taphian sea-raiders in harrying
the Thesprotians, men who had long been allies and friends to us.

Then they were eager to kill him and tear out the heart in his bosom,
and to devour all his abundant and heart-delighting substance;

but Odysseus restrained them and held them back in their eagerness.

Now you dishonor his house as you eat it away, and you woo his wife too;

you are killing his son, and you grieve me exceedingly deeply.

Therefore I bid you stop, and command all the rest to stop likewise.”
Then Eurymachus, son of Polybus, answered before her:

“Daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, take courage.

Do not let these things be matters of care in your spirit.

There is no such man, nor will there be, nor can one be born ever,
who will lay violent hands on your son Telemachus
while I am still alive and looking upon the light of the earth here.

For thus I will speak, and surely the thing will be brought to fulfillment:

quickly his black blood would flow all around my spear-shaft,
that man's;

for city-sacking Odysseus often before now
sat me upon his knees and placed roast meat in my own hands,
and held out red wine to me and let me drink from the cup there.

Therefore Telemachus is by far the dearest to me of all mortals,
and I tell him he need not fear death at the hands of the suitors;

but from the gods there is no escape for any man living.”
So he spoke, to encourage her;

yet he himself planned the death-stroke.

Then she went up again to her bright upper chamber in silence,
and there she wept for Odysseus, her own beloved husband,
until bright-eyed Athena cast sweet sleep down over her eyelids.

At evening the noble swineherd came back to Odysseus
and his son;