First she cast about his breast a mantle well washed and a tunic,
and she increased his stature and brought back the bloom of his young manhood.

Then once more his skin became dark, and his cheeks filled out firmly,
and blue-black grew the beard all around on the line of his chin there.

She, when she had done this, went back again;

but Odysseus
went to the hut, and his dear son looked on him in amazement.

Fearful, he turned his eyes away, in dread lest it might be a god there,
and lifting his voice he addressed him in winged words and spoke thus:

“Stranger, to me you appear quite changed from the man you were just now.

Other indeed are the clothes that you wear, and your skin is not the same.

Surely you are one of the gods who possess the broad heaven above us.

Be gracious, that we may present you with welcome offerings and with gifts,
fashioned in gold;

only spare us, I pray, and take pity upon us.”
Then in answer to him spoke the much-enduring noble Odysseus:

“I am no god.

Why is it that you compare me with the immortals?

No, I am your father, for whose sake you suffer in sorrow and groaning,
bearing much pain and enduring the violent outrage of menfolk.”
So he spoke, and he kissed his son;

from his cheeks to the ground then
tears fell down, though before he had always held back his weeping.

Yet Telemachus, since he had not yet been persuaded within him
that this was truly his father, again made answer and said to him:

“You are not Odysseus, not my father, but some divinity tricks me,
so that hereafter I may lament and grieve in yet greater abundance.

For no mortal man could contrive these things by the wit in his own breast,
unless some god himself had come here and stood by him in person,
and with ease made him young or else made him an old man, at pleasure.

For indeed just now you were old and wore most unseemly clothing,
but now you are like the gods who possess the broad heaven above us.”
Then in answer to him spoke the craft-rich, wise Odysseus:

“Telemachus, it is not fitting that you, with your father beside you,
should marvel beyond all measure or be so greatly astonished.

No other Odysseus will ever come here to you any longer,
but I am he, just such as I am, after suffering evils and wandering much,
and in the twentieth year I have come to the land of my fathers.

Yet this is the work of Athena, the driver and giver of spoil there,
who made me such as I am, in whatever way she desires, for she can,
now making me like a beggar, and now once more in another fashion
like to a young man wearing fine garments close over his body.

Easy it is for the gods who possess the broad heaven above us
both to exalt a mortal man and also to bring him to ruin.”
So he spoke, and he sat him down;

and Telemachus, flinging his arms round
his noble father, wept aloud, and tears ran down in a torrent.

In both of them there arose the desire for lamentation and mourning.

They cried aloud and sharply, more ceaselessly even than wild birds do,
ospreys or vultures with hooked claws, whose little unfledged nestlings
country men have taken away from the nest before they could fly upward.

So from beneath their brows they let fall piteous tears in abundance.

And the light of the sun would have set on them as they still lamented,
had not Telemachus suddenly spoken to his own dear father:

“Tell me, dear father, by what ship did sailors bring you hither
into Ithaca?

Who did they claim that they were among men there?

I do not think that you could have come here traveling on footpaths.”
Then in answer to him spoke the much-enduring noble Odysseus:

“Then indeed, my child, I will tell you the truth of this matter.