The Phaeacians brought me, renowned for the speed of their shipping,
they who convey other men as well, whoever reaches their people.

They were carrying me over the sea in a swift ship while I slumbered,
and they set me ashore in Ithaca and gave me splendid possessions,
bronze in abundance and gold and woven garments in plenty.

These now by the will of the gods lie stored away in the caverns.

Now I have come here following counsels and promptings of Athena,
so that together we may take thought for the slaughter of foemen.

Come then, tell me the number of suitors and count them before me,
so that I may know how many they are and what manner of men they are.

Then after turning it over within my impeccable spirit,
I will consider whether we two could stand up against them in combat,
all alone without others, or whether we should seek additional helpers.”
Then in answer to him spoke the thoughtful prince Telemachus:

“Father, indeed I have always been hearing the greatness of your glory,
how your hand is a spearman’s in fight, and your counsel is prudent;

but what you have said is too vast;

amazement has seized me, for never
could two men battle with many, and those men stalwart in prowess.

For the suitors are not in exactness ten men, nor twice ten only,
but far more numerous;

quickly you will know the full tale of their number.

Out of Dulichium there are two and fifty young nobles,
picked men, and with them six servants attending in order;

out of Same there are four and twenty men in all there,
out of Zacynthus there are twenty young Achaean princes,
and from Ithaca itself twelve men, all of them finest;

with them are Medon the herald, and the godlike singer,
and two attendants well skilled in the carving and sharing of portions.

If we two should encounter all these while they are inside here,
take care lest bitter and grim be the price of your vengeance upon them.

No, but do you, if you can devise some champion to aid us,
think on one who will stand by us two with a heart that is willing.”
Then in answer to him spoke the much-enduring great Odysseus:

“Then I will tell you;

do you attend and hearken unto me fully.

Consider if Athena with father Zeus beside her in favor
will be enough for us two, or I should seek some other defender.”
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered him face to face there:

“Noble indeed are those two champions of whom you are speaking,
though they sit high up above in the clouds;

and over all others
they hold sway, over mortal men and the gods who are deathless.”
Then in answer to him spoke the much-enduring great Odysseus:

“Those two shall not for long stand apart from the turmoil and onrush
of the strong battle, whenever among the suitors and us here
in my halls the might of Ares is brought to the test and decision.

But for now you must go at the hour when dawn is appearing
home to the house, and mix with the suitors so haughty and reckless;

later the swineherd himself will conduct me on into the city,
like to a beggar in wretchedness, and to an old man in semblance.

If they dishonor me there through the house, then let your dear spirit
bear it within your breast while I suffer evils before you,
even if they drag me by both of my feet through the hall and outdoors,
or if they pelt me with missiles;

do you, though looking, endure it.

Yet indeed you may bid them desist from their folly and madness,
speaking to them with gentle words by way of persuasion;

but never
will they obey you, for now their destined day is at hand there.

One thing more will I tell you, and do you lay it in your spirit: