But when now he had spoken the whole of the charge entrusted,
then he went on his way to the swine, and left court and hall there.

Then the suitors were pained, and in spirit were darkened and downcast,
and they came from the hall and passed by the great wall of the courtyard,
and there in front of the doors they sat themselves down together.

Then Eurymachus, son of Polybus, started to speak there:

“Friends, this is truly a great exploit brought off in presumption,
this voyage of Telemachus;

and yet we said he would not end it.

Come, let us haul down a black ship, whichever is best for us,
and let us gather rowers, men of the sea, to man her,
so they may swiftly announce to those others to voyage homeward.”
He had not yet spoken it all, when Amphinomus saw her,
turning about from his place, within the deep-bosomed harbor,
as they were furling the sail and holding the oars in their hands there.

Then with easy laughter he called and spoke to his comrades:

“Let us no longer press any message on others;

they are here now.

Either one of the gods has told them of this, or they themselves saw
the ship passing by, but they had no power at all to overtake her.”
So he spoke, and they rose and went to the shore of the sea there.

Quickly they hauled the black ship up and ashore on the mainland,
and the high-hearted servants carried away all their armor.

Then they themselves all together went into the place of assembly,
nor did they allow any other to sit there, young men or old ones.

Then Antinous spoke among them, the son of Eupeithes:

“Oh for shame, how the gods have released this man out of ruin.

Day after day our lookouts sat on the windy headlands,
ever in relays;

and then whenever the sun had gone under,
never on shore did we spend the night, but out on the sea there
sailing our swift ship onward we waited for bright Dawn’s appearing,
lying in ambush for brave Telemachus, so we might take him
and make an end of his life;

but a god brought him home in the meanwhile.

Come then, here let us ponder a grim destruction against him,
Telemachus, so he may not slip free from our hands;

for I tell you,
while he is living, I think this affair will not come to fulfillment.

For he himself now is skilled in counsel and strong understanding,
and the people are no longer wholly inclined to support us.

Come then, before he can gather the Achaeans into assembly,
let us act;

for I think he will not put off the matter much longer,
but in his anger will stand in the midst of them all and speak out,
how we contrived sheer murder for him, yet could not destroy him.

They will not praise us at all when they hear of these evil actions.

Let us beware lest they do us some harm and drive us in exile
out of our own dear land, and we come to a people of strangers.

Rather let us kill him when we catch him out in the farmland,
far from the city, or else on the road;

then his livelihood, all his
substance and goods, we ourselves may divide into portions among us,
while to his mother we give the house to possess with the man who shall wed her.

But if this plan is displeasing to you, and rather you wish it
that he himself should live and hold all his father’s possessions,
then let us no more continue assembling here in abundance,
wasting his rich stores away, but let each man go from his own house
and seek her hand with gifts of wooing and costly bride-offerings;

then she may marry the one who gives most and comes by fate to her.”
So he spoke, and they all became utterly silent in stillness.