So speaking, he drew the rags back from the great scar.

And when the two had seen it, and taken in each detail,
they wept, and threw their arms round thoughtful Odysseus,
and kissed his head and shoulders, welcoming him home;

and in the same way Odysseus kissed their heads and hands.

And the light of the sun would have gone down on their weeping
had not Odysseus himself checked them, and said:

"Enough of weeping and wailing — someone coming out
of the hall might see, and tell them there inside.

Go back in one at a time, not all together:

I first, you after.

And let this be the signal:

all the others — all the lordly suitors — will refuse
to let the bow and quiver be given to me;

but you, noble Eumaeus, carry the bow up the hall
and set it in my hands;

and tell the women
to bar the close-fitted doors of their quarters,
and if any one of them hears groaning or the crash of men
inside our walls, let her not run out,
but stay where she is, at her work, in silence.

And you, noble Philoetius:

your charge is the courtyard gates —
bolt them with the bar, and quickly lash the fastening on."
So speaking he entered the well-settled house
and went and sat on the stool from which he had risen;

and then the two slaves of godlike Odysseus came in too.

Eurymachus by now was handling the bow,
warming it this side and that at the glow of the fire —
and even so he could not string it.

His proud heart groaned aloud,
and bursting out in anger he spoke a word and named it:

"Damn it — here is a grief for me, for myself and for us all!

It is not the marriage I mourn so much, though that stings too:

there are plenty of other Achaean women, some right here
in sea-circled Ithaca, some in other towns.

No — it is that we fall so far short in strength
of godlike Odysseus that we cannot string
his bow.

A disgrace for even men unborn to hear of!"
Then Antinous answered him, Eupeithes' son:

"Eurymachus, it will not stand so — and you know it yourself.

Today, through all the land, is the feast of the god —
his holy day.

Who could be bending bows?

No —
set it down and be easy.

And the axes:

why not leave them
standing, all of them?

No one, I think, will carry them off —
no thief is coming into the hall of Laertes' son Odysseus.

Come — let the cupbearer pour first-drops in the cups,
so we can make libation, and lay aside the curved bow;

and in the morning tell Melanthius the goatherd
to drive in goats, the pick of all his herds,
so we can lay thigh-pieces on the altar of Apollo, lord of the bow,
and then try the bow, and finish out the contest."
So spoke Antinous, and his word pleased them well.

And heralds poured water over their hands,
and young men crowned the mixing-bowls with drink
and served it round to all, with first-drops in the cups.

And when they had poured, and drunk as much as their hearts would have,
Odysseus of the many designs, with craft in mind, spoke among them:

"Hear me, you suitors of the far-famed queen,
while I say what the heart in my breast commands.

To Eurymachus above all, and to godlike Antinous,
I make my plea — since he spoke this word too as it should be:

for now, let the bow rest;

turn it over to the gods;

and in the morning the god will give the mastery to whom he will.

But come — give me the polished bow, so among you
I can try my hands and my strength:

whether the force
is still there, that once lived in my supple limbs,
or wandering and neglect have destroyed it by now."
So he spoke;

and they were all outraged past measure,
in dread that he would string the polished bow.

And Antinous rebuked him, and spoke a word, and named him:

"You wretched stranger — not a grain of sense in you, not a trace!