Come then, you who are stronger than I am —
come try the bow, and let us finish out the contest."
So speaking he set the bow away from him on the ground,
leaning it against the joined and polished panels,
with the swift arrow propped on the fine door-hook there,
and sat back down on the chair from which he had risen.

And Antinous spoke among them, Eupeithes' son:

"Up, all you companions — in order, left to right,
starting from where the wine is always poured."
So spoke Antinous, and his word pleased them well.

And the first to rise was Leodes, the son of Oenops,
who was their sacrifice-diviner, and always sat
in the farthest corner by the beautiful mixing-bowl:

to him alone
their reckless outrages were hateful;

he was indignant at all the suitors.

He now was first to take the bow and the swift arrow,
and went and stood on the threshold and began to try the bow.

He could not string it:

long before that, hauling, his hands
gave out — his soft, unhardened hands;

and he said among the suitors:

"Friends, I cannot bend it.

Let another take it now.

Many chief men this bow is going to strip
of life and breath — since truly it is better far
to die than live on and miss the mark we gather here for
day upon day, forever, waiting on hope.

Now every man of you hopes, every heart is set
on marrying Penelope, Odysseus' bedmate.

But once he has tried the bow, and seen —
well, let him woo some other fair-robed Achaean woman
with his bride-gifts then, and seek her;

and let this one
marry the man who gives the most, and comes as her fate."
So he spoke his say, and set the bow away from him,
leaning it against the joined and polished panels,
with the swift arrow propped on the fine door-hook there,
and sat back down on the chair from which he had risen.

And Antinous rebuked him, and spoke a word, and named him:

"Leodes — what a word has slipped the fence of your teeth!

A dreadful word, a bitter one — I am angry just to hear it —
that this bow, if you please, will strip our chief men
of life and breath — because you cannot string it!

No:

your honored mother did not bear you the kind of man
who has it in him to draw a bow and shoot;

but the other lordly suitors will string it, and soon."
So he spoke, and gave his orders to Melanthius the goatherd:

"Look alive, Melanthius — light a fire in the hall,
and set a big bench by it with a fleece on top,
and bring out the great wheel of lard from the stores inside,
so we young men can warm the bow, and grease it
with the fat, and try it, and finish out the contest."
So he spoke;

and Melanthius quickly kindled the unwearying fire,
and carried up the bench and set it there with a fleece on it,
and brought out the great wheel of lard from the stores inside.

With that the young men warmed the bow and made their trials — and still
they could not string it:

they fell far short of the strength it took.

But Antinous still held off, and godlike Eurymachus,
the suitors' chiefs:

in prowess they were far the best of them.

Now out of the house those two had gone together,
the cowherd and the swineherd of godlike Odysseus,
and after them Odysseus himself, the noble one, came out.

And when they were outside the doors and the courtyard,
he raised his voice and spoke to them with gentle words:

"Cowherd — and you, swineherd — shall I say a thing to you,
or keep it to myself?

My heart tells me to say it.

What kind of men would you be, to fight for Odysseus,
if he came from somewhere — like that, out of nowhere — some god bringing him?

Would you fight for the suitors, or for Odysseus?

Speak out, as your heart and spirit bid you."
Then the cowherd answered him, the master of the oxen:

"Father Zeus, if only you would accomplish this desire: