Is it not enough that you feast at your ease with us,
the great ones — never stinted of the meal, listening in
on all our speeches and our talk?

No other stranger,
no beggar, gets to listen to our speeches.

It is the wine that has you — the honey-sweet:

it damages
any man who gulps it wide-mouthed past his measure.

Wine — it was wine that maddened the Centaur, famous Eurytion,
in the hall of great-hearted Peirithous,
on his visit to the Lapiths.

And when the wine had maddened his wits,
raving mad he did his evil in Peirithous' house;

and grief seized the heroes, and they leapt up and dragged him
out through the porch to the open air, and shore away
his ears and nose with the pitiless bronze;

and he, his wits
destroyed, went off in his witless heart, hauling his ruin with him.

From that came the feud between Centaurs and men;

but he found the evil first for himself, heavy with wine.

Just so I proclaim great trouble for you, if you should string
that bow.

You will meet no kindness
in this land of ours — we will pack you straight off in a black ship
to King Echetus, the maimer of all mankind,
and out of his hands nothing will save you.

Sit easy,
drink, and do not set yourself against younger men."
Then watchful-minded Penelope answered him:

"Antinous — it is not fine, and it is not just, to stint
the guests of Telemachus, whoever comes to this house.

Do you think — if this stranger strings the great bow of Odysseus,
trusting his hands and his own strength —
that he will lead me home and make me his wife?

He himself has no such hope in his breast.

Let none of you sit at the feast here grieving
over that:

it would not be seemly — no, and it is not thinkable."
Then Eurymachus, Polybus' son, answered her:

"Daughter of Icarius, watchful-minded Penelope,
it is not that we think he will lead you off — unthinkable —
but we shrink from the talk of men and women:

that one of the baser Achaeans may say someday,
'Men far weaker are wooing a blameless man's
wife — and they cannot even string his polished bow;

and then some other man, a wandering beggar, came
and strung the bow with ease, and shot through the iron.'
So they will say;

and for us that would be shame heaped on shame."
Then watchful-minded Penelope answered him:

"Eurymachus — there is no fair fame in the land, and cannot be,
for men who dishonor and devour the house
of their better.

Why count this thing your shame?

The stranger here is very tall, and firmly built,
and declares himself the son of a well-born father.

Come — give him the polished bow.

Let us see it.

For I will say this outright, and it will be accomplished:

if he strings it — if Apollo grants him that glory —
I will dress him in a cloak and a tunic, fine clothing,
and give him a sharp javelin, to keep off dogs and men,
and a two-edged sword;

and I will give him sandals for his feet,
and send him wherever his heart and spirit bid him go."
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered her:

"Mother mine — the bow:

no Achaean has better right than I
to give it or to refuse it to whomever I will —
not one of all who lord it through rocky Ithaca,
nor in the islands over toward horse-grazing Elis:

not one of them shall force me against my will, not even if I choose
to give the stranger this bow outright, to carry off for good.

Go into the house and see to your own work,
the loom and the distaff, and command your handmaids
to go about their work.

The bow belongs to men —
to all men, and to me above all:

mine is the power in this house."
In wonder, she went back into the house,
for she laid her son's clear-headed word to heart.

Climbing to her upper room with her serving-women,
she wept there for Odysseus, her dear husband, until
gray-eyed Athena cast sweet sleep upon her eyelids.