Odyssey — Book 3

Pylos: Nestor's tales of the returns; Telemachus rides for Sparta.

And the sun leapt up, leaving the beautiful water,
into the bronze-bright heaven, to shine for the immortals
and for mortal men across the grain-giving plowland;
and they came in to Pylos, the strong-built city of Neleus.
There on the beach of the sea the people were offering victims,
bulls all black, to the earth-shaker with the blue-black hair.
Nine tiers of seats there were, five hundred sitting in each,
and before each company nine bulls were held ready.
They had just tasted the innards, and were burning thigh-cuts for the god,
when the ship came straight in: they brailed the sails of the trim vessel,
furled them aloft, moored her, and stepped ashore themselves;
and Telemachus stepped from the ship, Athena going before him.
The goddess spoke to him first, gray-eyed Athena:
"Telemachus, no more need of shyness now, not a scrap of it:
this is why you have sailed the sea — to learn news
of your father: where the earth hides him, what doom he met.
Come then, go straight to Nestor, breaker of horses:
let us see what counsel he keeps hidden in his breast.
Beg him yourself, so that he speaks unerring truth.
He will tell you no lie: he is clear-headed beyond most men."

Then clear-headed Telemachus answered her:
"Mentor, how am I to go up? How greet him?
I have no practice yet in close-woven speech —
and a young man is shy of questioning his elder."

Then the goddess spoke to him again, gray-eyed Athena:
"Telemachus, some of it your own heart will see,
and some a god will prompt. For I do not think
you were born and raised without the gods' good will."

So speaking, Pallas Athena led the way
swiftly, and he followed in the footsteps of the god.
They came to the gathering-place of the men of Pylos, the rows of seats,
where Nestor sat with his sons, and around them companions
were readying the feast, roasting meats and skewering others.
But when they saw the strangers they came all in a crowd,
clasped their hands in welcome, and bade them be seated.
First Peisistratus, Nestor's son, coming near,
took the hands of both, and settled them at the feast
on soft fleeces over the sand of the sea,
beside his brother Thrasymedes and his father;
and he gave them portions of the innards, and poured wine
into a golden cup, and pledging her he addressed
Pallas Athena, daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus:
"Pray now, stranger, to the lord Poseidon,
for his is the feast you have found in coming here.
And when you have poured and prayed, as is right and custom,
give this man too the cup of honey-sweet wine
to pour, since he also, I think, prays to the deathless ones:
all men have need of the gods.
But he is the younger, my own age to the year,
and so to you first I give the golden cup."

With that he set in her hand the cup of sweet wine;
and Athena rejoiced in the man — clear-headed, just —
because to her first he gave the golden cup;
and at once she prayed at length to the lord Poseidon:
"Hear me, Poseidon who hold the earth, and do not grudge
us who pray the accomplishment of these works.
To Nestor first of all, and to his sons, grant glory,
and then to all the rest give gracious recompense,
to all the Pylians, for this splendid hecatomb.
And grant besides that Telemachus and I sail home with the thing accomplished
we came here for, in our fast black ship."
So she prayed — and she herself was accomplishing it all.
Then she gave Telemachus the beautiful two-handled cup,
and the dear son of Odysseus prayed the same.