Then Gerenian Nestor the horseman answered him:

"Dear boy — since you bring back the misery we endured
in that country, we headstrong sons of the Achaeans,
all our roving in ships across the misted sea
chasing plunder wherever Achilles led,
and all our fighting around the great city of lord Priam —
there, in those years, our best were killed.

There lies Ajax, dear to the war-god;

there Achilles;

there Patroclus, a counselor the equal of the gods;

there my own dear son, strong and without fault,
Antilochus — surpassing swift of foot, and a fighter.

And many other evils we suffered besides:

who among
mortal men could tell them all?

Not if you stayed five years — six years —
asking all the evils the noble Achaeans suffered there:

you would go home to your own country worn out first.

Nine years we stitched evils around them, plotting
with every kind of cunning — and the son of Cronos barely brought it to an end.

And there no man would set his wits against him openly —
willing, that is — for noble Odysseus won by far,
in every kind of cunning:

your father — if truly
you are his blood.

Awe takes me, looking at you.

Your speech, at least, is his:

you would not think
a younger man could speak so like him.

In all that time, I and noble Odysseus
never spoke on opposite sides in assembly or in council:

one heart between us — with sense and considered counsel
we planned for the Argives how the best might come about.

But when we had sacked Priam's steep city,
and gone to our ships, and a god scattered the Achaeans,
then, then Zeus devised in his heart a bitter homecoming
for the Argives — since not all of us were men of sense
or of justice.

So many of them came to an evil end
through the ruinous wrath of the gray-eyed daughter of the mighty Father —
who set strife between the two sons of Atreus.

The two of them called the Achaeans all to assembly —
rashly, in no due order, at the setting of the sun,
and the sons of the Achaeans came heavy with wine —
and they spoke out the reason they had gathered the army.

There Menelaus urged all the Achaeans
to remember homecoming across the broad back of the sea;

and it did not please Agamemnon, not at all:

he wanted
to hold the army back, and offer holy hecatombs
to heal the terrible anger of Athena —
the fool.

He did not know she was not to be persuaded:

the mind of the gods who are forever does not turn so fast.

So the two of them stood trading hard words;

and the strong-greaved Achaeans sprang up
with a huge din, and the counsel split them two ways.

That night we lay on our anger, brooding hard thoughts
against each other — for Zeus was readying the stroke of evil —
and at dawn half of us hauled our ships to the bright salt water
and loaded our goods aboard, and the deep-girdled women.

Half the army held back, staying
there with Atreus' son Agamemnon, shepherd of the people;

and half of us embarked and rowed.

And the ships ran fast,
for a god smoothed the sea over its monstrous deeps.

Coming to Tenedos, we offered victims to the gods,
aching for home.

But Zeus had no thought yet of homecoming —
iron-hearted, he stirred up evil strife a second time.

Some turned their curved ships around and went back —
those with Odysseus, the battle-wise lord, the man of shifting counsels —
carrying favor once again to Atreus' son Agamemnon.

But I, with the ships that followed me gathered close,
fled on, for I knew the god was devising evils.

And the warlike son of Tydeus fled, and roused his companions.

Late upon our track came fair-haired Menelaus,
and caught us at Lesbos debating the long crossing:

whether to sail above rugged Chios,
by the isle of Psyria, keeping Chios on our left,
or under Chios, past windy Mimas.