Then Gerenian Nestor the horseman answered him:

"Then I will tell you, child, the whole truth of it.

You have guessed yourself how it would have gone,
if Atreus' son, fair-haired Menelaus, coming from Troy,
had found Aegisthus alive in the halls:

no man would have heaped the mounded earth over his dead body —
dogs and birds would have torn him
as he lay on the plain far from the city, and not one
of the Achaean women would have wept him:

too monstrous the thing he schemed.

For we were over there, winning our many contests —
and he, at his ease in a fold of horse-grazing Argos,
worked all the while at Agamemnon's wife with charming words.

At first she pushed the shameful thing away —
shining Clytemnestra — for her mind was still sound;

and beside her, too, there was a singer, whom Atreus' son
strictly charged, when he left for Troy, to guard his wife.

But when the doom of the gods bound her to her undoing,
then Aegisthus led that singer to a desert island
and left him there, spoil and carrion for the birds,
and led her — he willing, she willing — home to his own house.

Many thigh-cuts he burned on the gods' holy altars,
many offerings he hung up, woven things and gold,
having accomplished the enormity his heart had never hoped for.

Now we had sailed together on the way from Troy,
Atreus' son and I, in all friendship;

but when we reached holy Sunium, the headland of Athens,
there Phoebus Apollo came with his gentle arrows
and killed the helmsman of Menelaus,
the steering-oar of the running ship still in his hands:

Phrontis, Onetor's son, who outdid all the tribes of men
at steering a ship when the storm-winds drive.

So Menelaus was held there, pressed though he was for the road,
to bury his companion and pay the death-rites over him.

But when he too, going on over the wine-dark sea
in the hollow ships, came at a run to the steep height
of Malea, then wide-voiced Zeus devised for him
a hateful road:

he poured on the breath of screaming winds
and monstrous waves, swollen huge as mountains.

There he split the fleet, and part he drove on Crete,
where the Cydonians lived around the streams of Iardanus.

There is a bare cliff, sheer to the salt water,
at the edge of Gortyn on the misted sea,
where the South Wind shoves the great swell on the left headland,
toward Phaestus, and a little stone holds back the great sea.

There part of them came in, and the men escaped destruction
barely, but the waves smashed the ships on the reefs;

and the other five ships with their dark-blue prows
the wind and the water carried and beached on Egypt.

So Menelaus, gathering much substance and gold,
roved with his ships among men of alien speech —
and in that very time Aegisthus schemed those horrors at home.

Seven years he reigned over Mycenae rich in gold,
having killed Atreus' son, and the people were broken under him;

but in the eighth his evil came on him:

noble Orestes,
back from Athens, cut down his father's killer —
Aegisthus of the crooked counsels, who cut down his famous father.

The killing done, he gave the Argives a funeral feast
for his hateful mother and for spineless Aegisthus;

and on that same day Menelaus of the great war-cry reached him,
bringing home treasure, all the freight his ships could bear.

You too, my friend:

do not wander long and far from home,
leaving your goods behind and men in your house
of such overbearing insolence — or they will devour it all,
dividing your goods among them, and your journey come to nothing.

But to Menelaus I bid you go — I urge it:

he is newly home from foreign parts,
from among peoples no man would hope in his heart
to return from, once the storm-winds had driven him astray
into a sea so vast that not even the birds
can cross it in a year — so vast it is, and terrible.