So he spoke, and they all fell to bustling. The heifer came
up from the plain; from the fast trim ship came
great-hearted Telemachus' companions; the smith came
with his bronze tools in his hands, the instruments of his art,
anvil and hammer and the well-made fire-tongs
he worked the gold with; and Athena came
to receive her offering. And the old horseman Nestor
gave gold, and the smith worked it and poured it round
the heifer's horns, so the goddess might see the glory and be glad.
Stratius and noble Echephron led her by the horns;
Aretus came from the storeroom carrying lustral water
in a flowered basin, and in his other hand the barley-grains
in a basket; and Thrasymedes, steadfast in battle, stood by
with a sharp axe in his hand, to strike the heifer down;
Perseus held the blood-bowl. And the old horseman Nestor
began with the hand-water and the barley-grains, and long to Athena
he prayed, making first offering, casting hairs from the head into the fire.
And when they had prayed and thrown the scattering barley,
straightway Nestor's son, high-spirited Thrasymedes,
stood close and struck: the axe cut through the tendons
of the neck, and undid the heifer's strength. And the women cried aloud —
the daughters and the sons' wives and the honored wife
of Nestor, Eurydice, eldest of the daughters of Clymenus.
Then the men lifted her up from the wide-wayed earth
and held her, and Peisistratus, leader of men, cut the throat.
And when the black blood had run out, and the life had left the bones,
quickly they broke her apart, and at once cut out the thigh-pieces
all in due order, and wrapped them deep in fat,
folding it double, and laid raw flesh upon them.
The old man burned them on the split wood, and poured the fire-bright wine
over; and the young men beside him held the five-tined forks.
And when the thighs were burned through, and they had tasted the innards,
they carved up the rest and threaded it on spits
and roasted it, holding the sharp spits in their hands.

Meanwhile beautiful Polycaste had bathed Telemachus —
the youngest daughter of Nestor, Neleus' son.
And when she had bathed him and rubbed him richly with oil,
she threw a beautiful mantle around him, and a tunic,
and he stepped from the bath with the body of an immortal,
and went and sat down beside Nestor, shepherd of the people.

And when they had roasted the outer meats and drawn them off,
they sat and feasted; and good men waited on them,
pouring wine into cups of gold.
But when they had put away desire for food and drink,
Gerenian Nestor the horseman began to speak among them:
"My sons, come — yoke the fine-maned horses for Telemachus,
lead them under the chariot, so he may be making his way."
So he spoke, and they listened well and obeyed:
quickly they yoked the swift horses under the chariot,
and the woman-steward put in bread and wine
and cooked meats, such things as Zeus-nurtured kings eat.
Then Telemachus mounted the beautiful chariot,
and beside him Peisistratus, Nestor's son, leader of men,
mounted the chariot and took the reins in his hands,
and whipped them to a run; and the pair flew on, nothing loath,
into the plain, and left the steep city of Pylos behind.
All day long they shook the yoke they bore between them.
The sun went down, and all the ways grew dark,
and they came to Pherae, to the house of Diocles,
son of Ortilochus, whom Alpheus fathered.
There they slept the night, and he set guest-gifts before them.