Go now, with your own ship and your companions;

or if you would rather go by land, chariot and horses are here,
and here are my sons, who will be your escorts
to shining Lacedaemon, where fair-haired Menelaus is.

Beg him yourself, so that he speaks unerring truth.

He will tell you no lie:

he is clear-headed beyond most men."

So he spoke; and the sun went down, and the dusk came on.
And among them spoke the goddess, gray-eyed Athena:
"Old sir, all this you have told rightly, in due measure.
But come — cut up the tongues now, and mix the wine,
so that we may pour to Poseidon and the other immortals
and then think of sleep. It is the hour for it:
the light is gone already under the western gloom, and it is not fitting
to sit long at the feast of the gods, but to go home."
So spoke the daughter of Zeus, and they heard her voice.
Heralds poured water over their hands,
and young men crowned the mixing-bowls with drink
and served all, pouring first drops in each cup for the gods;
and they threw the tongues in the fire, and stood, and poured above them.
But when they had poured, and drunk what their hearts would have,
then Athena and godlike Telemachus
both made to go back to the hollow ship.
But Nestor held them back, catching at them with his words:
"Zeus forbid it — and the other deathless gods —
that you should go from my house to your fast ship
as if from some man utterly cloakless and poor,
who has no cloaks, no plenty of blankets in his house,
no soft sleeping for himself or for his guests!
I have cloaks and beautiful blankets in plenty.
Never, while I live, shall the dear son of this man Odysseus
lie down on a ship's deck-planks — nor after,
while sons of mine are left in the halls
to host whatever guest arrives at my doors."

Then the goddess spoke to him again, gray-eyed Athena:
"Well said, dear old friend — and it is fitting
that Telemachus obey you: far better so.
Let him go with you now, then, and sleep
in your halls. But I will go to the black ship
to hearten the companions and give them all their orders.
For I may claim to be the only elder among them:
the rest are younger men who follow out of friendship,
all of an age with great-hearted Telemachus.
There let me lie down tonight, by the black hollow ship;
and in the morning I go on to the great-hearted Cauconians,
where a debt is owed me — no new thing
and no small one. But this man, since he has come to your house,
send on with a chariot and a son of yours; and give him horses,
your lightest runners, your strongest."

So speaking, gray-eyed Athena went away
in the likeness of a sea-eagle; and amazement took all who saw,
and the old man marveled, when his eyes had seen it.
He took Telemachus' hand, and spoke a word, and named him:
"Dear friend, I have no fear you will prove base or spineless,
if the gods walk with you so, escorts, and you so young!
For this was none other of those who hold Olympus
than the daughter of Zeus, most glorious Tritogeneia,
she who honored your noble father too among the Argives.
Queen, be gracious! Grant me good fame —
to me, to my children, to my honored wife —
and I in turn will offer you a yearling heifer, broad of brow,
unbroken, that no man has ever led under the yoke:
her I will offer to you, with gold poured round her horns."
So he spoke in prayer, and Pallas Athena heard him.