Then Gerenian Nestor the horseman led them —
his sons and his daughters' husbands — to his beautiful house.
And when they reached the lord's famous house,
they sat in order on the benches and the high-backed chairs,
and for their coming the old man mixed a bowl
of sweet-drinking wine, eleven years old,
which the woman-steward opened, loosening the sealing cap.
Of this the old man mixed a bowl, and to Athena
he prayed long, pouring, to the daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus.
But when they had poured, and drunk what their hearts would have,
the others went home to sleep, each man to his own house,
but Gerenian Nestor the horseman laid him down there —
Telemachus, dear son of godlike Odysseus —
on a corded bedstead under the echoing porch,
and beside him Peisistratus of the good ash spear, leader of men,
the one son in his halls still unwed;
and he himself slept in the inner room of the high house,
where the lady his wife made ready his bed and his rest.

When Dawn appeared, the early-born, with fingers of rose,
Gerenian Nestor the horseman rose up from his bed,
and came out, and took his seat on the polished stones
that stood before his high doors,
white, gleaming as if with oil. On these, in the old days,
Neleus used to sit, a counselor the equal of the gods;
but he long since had gone down to Hades, broken by fate,
and now Gerenian Nestor sat there in his turn, warder of the Achaeans,
holding the scepter. Around him his sons gathered in a body,
coming from their rooms: Echephron and Stratius,
Perseus and Aretus and godlike Thrasymedes;
and sixth came the hero Peisistratus to join them,
and they led godlike Telemachus and seated him beside them.
And Gerenian Nestor the horseman began to speak among them:
"Quickly, dear children, work my wish for me,
so that first of all the gods I may propitiate Athena,
who came to me in visible presence at the god's rich feast.
Come then: one of you to the plain for a heifer, fast as may be,
and let the cowherd drive her in;
one go down to great-hearted Telemachus' black ship
and bring up all his companions — leave two men only;
one bid the goldsmith Laerces come here
to pour gold round the heifer's horns.
The rest of you stay here together; and tell the slave-women
inside to make ready a feast through the famous house —
seats, and firewood round about, and shining water."