"Laodamas, why do you all urge this on me, mocking?

Cares are closer to my heart than contests.

I have suffered much before now, much have I labored,
and now I sit in your gathering hungry for homecoming,
pleading with the king and with all the people."
Then Euryalus answered him — and jeered to his face:

"No, stranger:

I do not take you for a man of contests,
such as are held in plenty among mankind —
rather for one who plies to and fro in a many-benched ship,
a master of sailors who are traders,
with a memory for cargo, an eye on his freight
and his grasping profits.

You are no athlete."
Then, glaring from under his brows, Odysseus of the many designs replied:

"Stranger, you have not spoken well.

You are like a man blinded by folly.

So true it is that the gods do not give their graces to all men
alike — not build, and brains, and speaking-skill together.

One man is slighter to look at, but the god
crowns his shape with words, and men gaze at him
delighted, while he speaks on without a stumble,
with honeyed modesty, and shines among the gathered people,
and when he walks the town they look on him as on a god.

Another again is like the immortals in beauty,
but no grace is set like a crown upon his words.

So with you:

your looks are striking — not a god
could better them — but your mind is an empty thing.

You have stirred the heart in my breast
by speaking out of all measure.

I am no novice at contests,
whatever you may say.

I count myself among the first,
as long as I could trust my youth and these my hands.

Now I am held in misery and pain:

I have endured much,
cutting through wars of men and the grinding waves.

But even so, for all my many evils, I will try your contests:

your word has bitten to the heart, and your speech has stung me to it."
He spoke, and cloak and all he sprang up, and seized a discus
bigger than the rest, and thick — heavier by no small measure
than the ones the Phaeacians threw among themselves.

He spun and let it fly from his massive hand,
and the stone hummed;

and down to the ground they cowered —
the Phaeacians of the long oars, men famed for ships —
under the rush of the stone.

Past all their marks it flew,
running light off his hand.

And Athena set the mark,
in the likeness of a man, and spoke a word, and named him:

"Even a blind man, stranger, could pick out your token,
groping — for it is not mixed in with the crowd of them
but far in front.

Take heart, at least for this contest:

no Phaeacian will reach this, let alone throw beyond it."