And the sacred strength of Alcinous led the way,
and they came and sat down on the high seats.

And then the strength of Alcinous said to Arete:

"Bring here a glorious chest, wife — the best one —
and set in it yourself a fresh-washed mantle and a tunic.

And heat the bronze cauldron over the fire, and warm water,
so that once he has bathed, and seen well laid together all
the gifts the blameless Phaeacians have brought him here,
he may take joy in the feast, and in hearing the singer's strain.

And I will give him this beautiful cup of mine,
golden, so that remembering me all his days
he may pour in his hall to Zeus and the other gods."
So he spoke, and Arete told her slave-women
to set a great three-legged cauldron on the fire with all speed.

They set the bath-cauldron on the blazing fire
and poured water in, and fed the wood beneath till it flamed:

the fire wrapped round the belly of the cauldron, and the water warmed.

Meanwhile Arete brought out from her chamber a beautiful chest
for the stranger, and laid the fine gifts in it,
the clothing and the gold the Phaeacians had given,
and in with them she laid a mantle and a beautiful tunic,
and lifting her voice she spoke winged words to him:

"See to the lid yourself now, and tie the knot on it quickly,
for fear someone rob you on the voyage, when later on
you sleep your sweet sleep as the black ship carries you."
And when much-enduring noble Odysseus heard it,
at once he fitted the lid, and quickly tied upon it
the intricate knot that the lady Circe once taught him.

And straightway the housekeeper called him to his bath,
to step in the tub;

and his heart was glad at the sight
of the hot water:

for he had known no such tending
since he left the house of fair-haired Calypso —
though while he was there, he was tended like a god without fail.

And when the slave-women had bathed him and rubbed him with oil,
and thrown a beautiful cloak around him, and a tunic,
he stepped from the bath and went to join the men at their wine.

And Nausicaa, with her beauty from the gods,
stood by the pillar of the close-built roof,
and marveled at Odysseus as her eyes took him in,
and lifting her voice she spoke winged words to him:

"Farewell, stranger.

And sometime, in your own fatherland,
remember me — for to me first you owe the price of your life."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered her:

"Nausicaa, daughter of great-hearted Alcinous:

only may Zeus grant it so — the loud-thundering lord of Hera —
that I go home and look upon my day of homecoming:

then even there I would pray to you as to a god,
always, all my days.

For you saved my life, girl."
He spoke, and went to his seat beside King Alcinous.

And already they were serving portions and mixing the wine,
and the herald came near, leading the trusted singer,
Demodocus, honored among the people, and seated him
in the middle of the feasters, leaning him on a tall pillar.

And then Odysseus of the many designs called the herald —
cutting off a slice of the chine, with more left over,
of the white-tusked hog, rich fat along it either side:

"Herald — here, take this cut of meat to Demodocus,
so he may eat;

and I will pay my respects to him, for all my grief.

For among all men upon the earth, singers
have their share of honor and reverence, because the Muse
has taught them her paths, and loves the tribe of singers."
So he spoke, and the herald carried it and set it in the hands
of the hero Demodocus;

and he received it, and his heart was glad.

And their hands went out to the good things spread before them.

But when they had put away desire for food and drink,
then Odysseus of the many designs said to Demodocus:

"Demodocus, I praise you beyond all mortal men.

Either the Muse taught you, Zeus' daughter, or Apollo: