Odyssey — Book 8

The games; the song of Ares and Aphrodite; the wooden horse, and the weeping guest.

When Dawn appeared, the early-born, with fingers of rose,
the sacred strength of Alcinous rose up from his bed,
and up rose Zeus-born Odysseus, sacker of cities.
And the sacred strength of Alcinous led the way
to the Phaeacians' gathering-place, built there beside the ships.
They came and sat down on the polished stones
side by side. And Pallas Athena went up and down the city
in the likeness of a herald of wise Alcinous,
devising the homecoming of great-hearted Odysseus,
and standing beside each man she spoke her word:
"This way, come — leaders and counselors of the Phaeacians —
to the gathering-place, to learn about the stranger
who has come new to the house of wise Alcinous
after wandering the sea — a man like the immortals in body."
So speaking she stirred the strength and spirit of each,
and quickly the gathering-place and the seats were filled
with men assembling; and many marveled at the sight
of Laertes' battle-wise son. For Athena
poured a wondrous grace over his head and shoulders
and made him taller to look at, and broader,
so that he might be dear to all the Phaeacians,
and dreaded, and revered, and might accomplish the many
trials in which the Phaeacians would test Odysseus.
And when they were assembled, all in one gathering,
Alcinous addressed them all, and said:
"Hear me, leaders and counselors of the Phaeacians,
while I say what the heart in my breast commands.
This stranger — I do not know who he is — has come wandering to my house,
whether from the men of the east or of the west;
he presses for a sending, and pleads that it be made sure.
Let us then, as always before, speed his sending on.
For no man, no — no one who ever comes to my house
waits here long, grieving for his escort.
Come: let us haul a black ship down to the bright salt water,
one on her first voyage, and let fifty-two young men
be chosen through the town, as many as have proven best.
Lash your oars well to the benches, every one,
then come ashore; and afterward come to my house
and see to a feast at speed: I will provide well for all.
To the young men these are my orders. And you others,
sceptered kings, come to my beautiful house,
so we may welcome the stranger in the halls —
let no man refuse. And call the godlike singer,
Demodocus: for to him the god has given song
beyond all others, to delight men however his heart is stirred to sing."
So speaking he led the way, and the sceptered kings
followed with him; and a herald went for the godlike singer.
And the fifty-two young men, chosen out,
went, as he commanded, to the beach of the barren sea.
And when they had come down to the ship and the sea,
they hauled the black ship down to deep water,
and set the mast and the sails in the black ship,
and fitted the oars into their leather slings,
all in due order, and spread the white sails open.
They moored her well out in the water, and then
went their way to the great house of wise Alcinous.
And the porticoes and courts and halls were filled
with men assembling: there were many, young and old.
For them Alcinous slaughtered twelve sheep,
eight white-tusked hogs, and two shambling oxen;
these they flayed and dressed, and made the lovely feast ready.