This the famous singer sang.

But Odysseus
took his great purple cloak in his heavy hands
and drew it down over his head, and hid his handsome face:

he was ashamed to let the tears run under his brows before the Phaeacians.

Whenever the godlike singer paused in his singing,
he would wipe the tears away, and take the cloak from his head,
and lifting the two-handled cup would pour to the gods;

but whenever he began again, and the best of the Phaeacians
urged him to sing, because they took joy in the tale,
Odysseus would cover his head again, and mourn.

From all the others he hid the tears he shed;

Alcinous alone remarked him and noticed,
sitting beside him, and heard his heavy groaning.

At once he spoke among the oar-loving Phaeacians:

"Hear me, leaders and counselors of the Phaeacians.

By now we have had our hearts' fill of the shared feast,
and of the lyre, which is the companion of the rich feast.

Now let us go out and try our hands at contests,
all of them — so that the stranger may tell his own people,
when he has come home, how far we surpass others
at boxing and wrestling and jumping and speed of foot."
So speaking he led the way, and they went with him.

And the herald hung the clear-voiced lyre on its peg,
took Demodocus by the hand, and led him out of the hall,
guiding him along the same road the others
had gone, the best of the Phaeacians, to wonder at the games.

They went their way to the gathering-place, and a huge crowd followed,
thousands;

and many fine young men stood up.

Up rose Acroneus and Ocyalus and Elatreus,
Nauteus and Prymneus and Anchialus and Eretmeus,
Ponteus and Proreus, Thoon and Anabesineus,
and Amphialus, son of Polyneus, Tecton's son;

and up rose Euryalus, the equal of man-destroying Ares,
Naubolus' son, who was best in beauty and body
of all the Phaeacians after blameless Laodamas.

And up stood the three sons of blameless Alcinous:

Laodamas, and Halius, and godlike Clytoneus.

First they made trial of one another in the footrace.

The course was stretched for them from the turning-post, and all together
they flew off quickly, raising the dust of the plain;

and far the best at running was blameless Clytoneus:

by as much as the width of a mule-team's furrow in fallow ground,
by that much he outran the rest to the crowd, and left them behind.

Then they made trial of grinding wrestling,
and there Euryalus outdid all the best;

at the jump Amphialus was first of them all;

with the discus far the best of all was Elatreus,
and at boxing Laodamas, Alcinous' good son.

And when they had all taken their hearts' pleasure in the contests,
Laodamas, Alcinous' son, spoke among them:

"Come, friends, let us ask the stranger whether he knows
any contest, and has learned it.

In build, at least, he is no mean man —
the thighs and calves of him, the two arms above,
the massive neck, the great strength;

nor does he lack
the prime of youth — only he is broken by many evils.

For I say there is nothing worse than the sea
to shatter a man, however strong he be."
Then Euryalus answered him in turn, and said:

"Laodamas, you have spoken this word in due measure.

Now go yourself and challenge him, and speak your speech."
And when the good son of Alcinous heard it,
he went and stood in the middle, and addressed Odysseus:

"Come you too, father stranger:

try your hand at the contests,
if you have learned any — and it is like you to know contests:

for there is no greater fame for a man, while he lives,
than what he achieves with his own feet and hands.

Come, make a trial;

scatter the cares from your heart.

Your road will not be long delayed now:

already
the ship is hauled down, and the companions are ready."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered him: