he destroyed that reckless people and likewise destroyed himself also.

Then with the maiden Poseidon lay and fathered a great son,
great-hearted lord Nausithous, king of the whole Phaeacian people.

Then Nausithous fathered Alcinous and lord Rhexenor;

though still a bridegroom and sonless there in his palace, Rhexenor
fell to Apollo, who struck with a silver bow, leaving one child,
only Arete, whom then Alcinous married and honored
more than all other women are honored throughout the whole wide earth-land,
all of the women who live in the houses beneath their husbands.

So much heartfelt honor she had and continues to carry,
both from the children she loves and from lord Alcinous himself and
all of the people, who look at the queen as they look at a goddess,
greeting her warmly whenever she walks through the streets of the city.

She is herself never lacking in noble understanding;

those she regards with her favor, including men, she delivers
out of their quarrels.

If she in her heart should regard you with kindness,
there is a hope that your family still shall be seen, and you shall come
into your high-roofed house and the land of the people who fathered you.”
Thus having spoken, the gray-eyed goddess Athena departed,
going across the unharvested sea from the beautiful island
Scheria, coming to Marathon and broad-wayed Athens,
entering there the strongly built house of lord Erechtheus.

Meanwhile Odysseus went to the glorious house of Alcinous;

there as he stood, before coming to bronze at the threshold, his dear heart
churned in his chest, for a shining as bright as the sun or the moonlight
ran through the high-roofed house of the great-hearted lord Alcinous.

Bronze were the walls that extended in both directions from doorway
into the innermost chamber, encircled with blue-colored enamel.

Golden doors sealed up on the inside the strongly built palace;

silver doorposts were standing upon the great threshold of bronze-work,
silver the lintel above, while the handle was fashioned of gold-work.

There upon either side stood dogs that were silver and golden,
made by Hephaestus himself with the craft and the cunning he carries,
there to keep watch on the palace of great-hearted lord Alcinous,
deathless forever and free from old age through all of existence.

Seats stood within, all around by the walls on either direction,
running from threshold to innermost chamber in one unbroken order;

over them all had been thrown fine coverings woven by women.

There the Phaeacian leaders were seated in orderly places,
drinking and eating, for these provisions of theirs never failed them.

Golden young men upon strongly constructed pedestals stood there,
holding aloft in their hands burning torches, continually giving
light through the palace by night to illuminate those at the feasting.

Fifty serving women perform all the work of the household;

some of them grind the apple-gold grain in the mills of the palace,
others are weaving before the looms and are turning the spindles,
seated together as closely as leaves on the tall-growing poplar;

oil drips softly and smooth from the linen that closely they weave there.

Just as Phaeacian men surpass every other in knowledge
how to propel the fast-faring ship through the sea, so the women
master the loom, for Athena has granted to them beyond others
knowledge of beautiful handiwork joined with a noble intelligence.

Outside the courtyard and close to the doors is a great spreading orchard,
four acres large, with a hedge driven round it in opposite courses.

There magnificent trees stand flourishing, covered with leafage,
pear trees, pomegranates, and apples with fruit that is radiant,
figs that are sweet, and the richly flourishing fruit of the olive.