from the river that Zeus made swollen I climbed, and I entered
under the bushes, where fallen leaves I had gathered around me;

there some divinity poured out a measureless slumber upon me.

There among leaves with a heart overcome by sorrow I slumbered
all of the night and the morning and on to the middle of daylight;

sun was descending before the sweet sleep let me go from its power.

Then I beheld your daughter's attendants at play on the seashore,
while she was there in their midst and resembled the gods in her beauty.

There I entreated her;

she was not lacking in noble discernment,
such as you could not expect from the young when you meet them directly,
face to face, since younger people are always unthinking.

Food she provided in plentiful measure and fire-bright wine there,
bathed me as well in the stream, and she gave me the clothing you look at.

This, though I grieve as I tell it, is how the whole matter has happened.”
Then in his turn Alcinous answered and spoke to Odysseus:

“Stranger, in this one matter my child did not think in the proper
manner, because with her serving attendants she brought you not homeward,
even though she was the first one to whom you had made supplication.”
Then resourceful Odysseus spoke and addressed him in answer:

“Hero, do not now scold your faultless daughter about this;

she did command me to follow along with her serving attendants.

I was unwilling because of my fear and a sense of the shame there,
lest perhaps your own heart should be darkened at seeing us walking;

we are a jealousy-minded race, all the mortals who live here.”
Then in his turn Alcinous answered and spoke to Odysseus:

“Stranger, the heart that is held in my breast is never so fashioned
that I am angered for nothing;

due measure in everything is better.

If only Zeus our father, Athena, and lordly Apollo
granted that, being the man you are now, with your thinking like my own,
you take my child as your wife and be called my son by our marriage,
staying among us;

a house and possessions would then be provided,
if you remained of your will.

No Phaeacian ever shall hold you
here by compulsion;

may Zeus our father forbid such a manner.

As for your sending, I set it tomorrow, so you may be certain.

Until that time you shall lie overcome by the sweetness of sleeping;

they shall row over calm seas, until you arrive in your homeland,
come to your house or whatever location is dearest unto you,
even if lying far further away from our home than Euboea,
which all our people declare is the farthest of countries, the people
having once seen it when they took the fair-haired lord Rhadamanthus
there for a visit to Tityus, child of the earth-mother Gaia.

All of the way there they went, accomplishing it without labor,
sailing again and completing the homeward return the same day there.

You shall discover yourself in your heart how greatly my vessels
are the most excellent ships, and my young men are best with the oar-blades.”
Thus did he speak, and the much-enduring lordly Odysseus
felt great delight;

and he spoke in a prayer and addressed the immortals:

“Father Zeus, may Alcinous fulfill every word he has spoken;

then on the grain-giving earth his fame shall never be quenched there,
while I shall come to my country at last and the home of my fathers.”
Thus did the two speak words in this manner between one another.

Meanwhile, white-armed Arete instructed the serving attendants
under the portico there to set beds and to spread on them beautiful
purple blankets, and over the top to lay rugs for the sleepers,
placing the thick woolen mantles above them to serve as a covering.

Out of the great hall they came, in their hands burning torches;