Then, when they poured to the gods and had drunk as their spirits desired it,
all of the others went home to lie down and sleep in their houses,
leaving the noble Odysseus behind in the hall by himself there.

Queen Arete remained there beside him and godlike Alcinous,
while the attendants removed from the hall all remains of the feasting.

Then white-armed Arete began to address them and question,
since she had recognized mantle and tunic, the beautiful clothing
she had herself made together with serving women around her.

Raising her voice, she addressed great Odysseus in winged language:

“Stranger, this first of all I shall ask you and ask you directly:

who are you, whence have you come, and who gave you the clothing you carry?

Did you not say that you came to this country while wandering sea-ways?”
Then resourceful Odysseus spoke and addressed her in answer:

“Hard it would be, O queen, to relate every grief in its order,
since the immortals in heaven have given me manifold sorrows.

Yet I shall answer the thing you have asked and are seeking to learn here.

Far in the sea is an island, Ogygia, distant from all lands;

there Atlas' daughter resides, the beautiful-haired and deceptive
goddess Calypso, a terrible power, whom no one approaches,
neither the gods nor the mortals who live on the grain-bearing earth-land.

Yet some divinity brought unfortunate me to her hearthstone,
only myself, after Zeus with a flash of his white-colored lightning
shattered apart my swift ship in the midst of the wine-dark water.

There all the rest of my excellent companions together had perished;

I threw my arms round the keel of the curving ship and was carried
over the sea for nine days;

on the tenth, in the blackness of nighttime,
gods brought me close to Ogygia, the island where lovely-haired and
terrible goddess Calypso resides;

and she welcomed and loved me,
caring for me with devotion and saying that she would immortal
make me and ageless as well through all of the days of existence.

Yet she could never persuade the heart in my breast to accept it.

Seven years long I remained there without an end, and forever
watered with tears the immortal clothing Calypso had given.

Then, when the eighth year finally came as the seasons were wheeling,
only at last she commanded and urged me to make my departure,
either because Zeus sent her a message or changed was her own mind.

She sent me off on a raft joined up with securely bound timbers,
giving me plentiful bread and sweet wine and clothing my body
there in immortal garments;

she sent me a mild following fair wind.

Seventeen days I continued my sailing across the salt water;

then on the eighteenth day all the shadowy mountains appeared there,
mountains belonging to you, and my own heart was gladdened to see them,
though I was fated to meet once again with abundant affliction,
sent against me by lord of the earth-shaking waters Poseidon.

He set the winds against me and closed every road of returning,
raising a sea beyond speaking;

and no wave allowed me to travel
onward upon my raft, although I was groaning in anguish.

Then in the storm was my raft torn apart, but I journeyed by swimming,
cutting across the great chasm, until both the wind and the water
carried me close to your coastline and brought me at last to your country.

There, as I climbed from the water, the waves would have hurled me on shoreline,
dashing my body on giant rocks in a joyless location.

Yet I gave way and returned to the water and swam till I came to
one river mouth, where the ground at the last seemed the finest for landing,
clear of all stones, and a place of protection existed from wind there.

There I collapsed and recovered my spirit, and ambrosial nighttime
came;