Thus he prayed there, the much-enduring lordly Odysseus,
while the strength of the mules brought the maiden into the city.

Then, when she came to the glorious palace belonging to father,
there at the gate she halted, and round her stood all of her brothers,
men who resembled immortals;

they loosened the mules from the wagon,
carrying all of the garments inside;

but Nausicaa entered
into her room, where the fire was lit by the aged attendant,
Apeire-born Eurymedusa, who kept the young maiden's chamber.

Long before then, the hollow ships carried her out of Apeire,
chosen to be a reward of honor for lord Alcinous,
since he was king of the whole Phaeacian people, who heard him
speaking as though he were god.

She had nursed white-armed Nausicaa
there in the palace;

she kindled the fire and prepared the girl's supper.

Then great Odysseus rose and went to the city;

Athena,
holding a kindly intention for him, poured mist all around him,
thickly, so none of the great-hearted men of Phaeacia, meeting,
taunted the stranger in speech and demanded to know who he might be.

Yet when Odysseus was just at the point of approaching the lovely
city, the gray-eyed goddess Athena came forward to meet him,
taking the form of a young unmarried girl with a pitcher.

Standing before him, she waited, and lord Odysseus addressed her:

“Child, will you guide me to find the house of a man who is known as
lord Alcinous, king who commands all the people around here?

I am a stranger who comes after suffering greatly, arriving
here from a faraway country;

and none of the mortals I know here,
none of the people whose country and city surround me in this place.”
Then the gray-eyed goddess Athena addressed him in answer:

“Fatherly stranger, I shall show you the house you have asked me
now to reveal, for it stands near the house of my blameless father.

Only continue in silence this way, while I lead you onward;

look at no one among the inhabitants, asking no questions.

These men do not readily suffer the company of strangers,
nor do they welcome with love any man who arrives from another
country;

instead, they rely on their rapidly traveling vessels,
crossing the mighty gulf, for the Earth-shaker gave them this power:

ships of surpassing swiftness, like wings or the thought of a mortal.”
Thus having spoken, the goddess Athena led swiftly before him,
while he continued behind, in the steps of divinity walking.

None of the ship-famed Phaeacians observed great Odysseus
moving along through the city among them, for Pallas Athena,
lovely-haired terrible goddess, would not permit them to see him,
pouring a marvelous mist all around him, with kind thought within her.

There great Odysseus marveled at harbors and balanced vessels,
marveled at meeting places where heroes assembled, and marveled
also at towering walls, fitted strongly with stakes, a great wonder.

Then, when they came to the glorious house of Alcinous the ruler,
there the gray-eyed goddess Athena began to address him:

“Fatherly stranger, behold now the house you have asked me to show you.

There you shall find the Zeus-nurtured kings at the feast in the palace.

Enter within, and do not be frightened at heart;

for a bold man
always is best in the end in whatever endeavor he makes there,
even if he should arrive from an alien country among them.

First you shall come on the queen of the household inside of the palace;

Arete is her name, and she comes from the parents who also
brought into life Alcinous the king who commands the Phaeacians.

First Nausithous was born to the earth-shaking lord Poseidon
and Periboea, most beautiful woman of all then,
youngest among all the daughters of great-hearted lord Eurymedon,
who in the past was the king of the overbearing Giants;