Never is fruit on these trees ever ruined or ever found wanting,
winter or summer, throughout the full year, but continually West Wind,
breathing across them, makes some of the fruit grow and ripens the others.

Pear after pear grows old, apple following apple;

cluster on cluster of grapes, fig after fig grow to ripeness.

There as well is his vineyard, abundant in fruit and established;

part is a level and open place where the harvest is drying,
baking beneath the sun;

other grapes they are gathering in there,
others they tread, while the unripe grapes grow in front of the workers,
some rows shedding the blossom and others beginning to purple.

There beside the furthest row of the vines are the orderly garden
beds of every green that are shining throughout the full year there.

Two springs rise;

one stream is scattered throughout the entire
garden, and one runs under the threshold that enters the courtyard,
flowing toward the high palace, where townspeople draw up the water.

Such were the glittering gifts of the gods at the house of Alcinous.

There the much-enduring Odysseus stood in amazement;

then, when his heart had marveled at everything there in the palace,
rapidly he stepped over the threshold and entered the great hall.

There he discovered Phaeacian leaders and counselors standing,
pouring the wine from their cups to the sharp-sighted slayer of Argus,
since their last pouring was always to him when they thought about sleeping.

Then the much-enduring Odysseus went through the palace,
clothed in the thickening mist that the goddess Athena had poured there,
until he came to Arete and lord Alcinous the ruler.

Then he threw both of his arms round the knees of the queenly Arete;

just at that moment the god-sent mist fell away from around him.

Everyone fell into silence throughout the great house when they saw him,
watching the stranger in wonder, while lord Odysseus entreated:

“Queen Arete, the daughter of godlike Rhexenor, hear me:

after great labors I come to your knees and the knees of your husband,
also to these at the banquet.

May all of the gods grant them blessed
lives, and may each of them give to his children the goods in his palace,
also the honor the people have granted to him in the country.

Yet for myself, send me quickly, that I may arrive in my homeland,
for I have suffered long, far away from the people who love me.”
Thus having spoken, he sat in the ash by the fire on the hearthstone;

all of the company stayed where they were and continued in silence.

After a long time the old lord Echeneus addressed them,
elder in birth than the rest of the men of Phaeacia assembled,
excellent speaker, with knowledge of many things out of the old days.

Holding a kindly intention, he spoke and addressed the assembly:

“Lord Alcinous, this is not the proper or beautiful manner,
having a stranger sit on the ground in the ash by the hearth-fire,
while all the people restrain themselves and await your decision.

Come then, raise up the stranger yourself and provide him a resting
place on a silver-studded chair;

and command all the heralds
now to mix further wine, so we may pour out to Zeus who delights in
thunder, who travels beside all suppliants deserving of honor.

Then let the housekeeper give from her stores to the stranger his supper.”
Then, when the sacred strength of Alcinous heard what was spoken,
straightway he took by the hand battle-wise and ingenious Odysseus,
raising him up from the hearth and seating him there on a bright chair,
making his well-beloved and kindly son Laodamas
rise, who had sat at his side, and whom he loved more than the others.