Then an attendant brought water for washing their hands in a pitcher,
beautiful, fashioned of gold, and she poured it above a great silver
basin for washing;

beside them she drew up a table with polish.

Then the respected housekeeper carried the bread and set it
there before them with manifold dishes, and gave of her stores freely.

Then great-hearted and much-enduring Odysseus ate and
drank, while the strength of Alcinous spoke to the herald beside him:

“Lord Pontonous, now mix us a bowl and distribute the wine here
all through the hall, so we also may pour out to Zeus who delights in
thunder, who travels beside all suppliants deserving of honor.”
Thus did he speak, and Pontonous mixed up the heartening wine there,
serving them all and beginning with drops in each cup for the deathless.

Then, when they poured to the gods and had drunk as their spirits desired it,
lord Alcinous spoke and addressed everyone in the great hall:

“Hear me, Phaeacian leaders and counselors, while I am speaking
what in the heart in my breast has commanded me now to declare here.

Now you have feasted;

return to your homes and lie down for resting.

Come morning, we shall call into assembly more of the elders,
welcome the stranger here in our palace, and offer the gods all
beautiful victims;

and afterward we shall consider his sending,
how without any labor or suffering under our escort
he may arrive in his own beloved fatherland, taking
joy in a speedy arrival, although he has come from a far land,
suffering no harm at all and no evil amid the long passage,
not until he sets foot in the country he calls his own country.

Afterward he shall suffer whatever his Destiny and the
solemnly spinning Fates spun out when his mother had borne him.

Yet if he is some immortal who comes from the heavens above us,
then the immortals must fashion a new kind of purpose against us.

Always before this the gods have appeared to our eyes without hiding,
every time we present them with glorious hecatomb offerings;

sitting among us they feast in the place where we mortals are sitting.

Even if one of us meets one of them on the road as a lone man,
they do not hide, for we are of the nearest kin to immortals,
just as the wild race of Giants and Cyclopes also are godlike.”
Then resourceful Odysseus spoke and addressed him in answer:

“Lord Alcinous, ease your heart, for I am not one of the deathless
gods who inhabit the open expanses of heaven, resembling
them in the form or the stature;

instead, I resemble the mortals.

Whichever people you know in humanity carrying heaviest
burdens of pain, I would liken myself in my sorrows to their kind.

Yes, I could tell you a longer account of the evils I suffered,
all the afflictions I labored through by the will of the gods here.

Yet let me finish my supper in spite of the grief I am bearing;

nothing is more dog-shameless than hateful hunger within us,
which by its violence forces a man to remember its presence,
though he is worn by his labor and carries great sorrow within him,
just as I carry great sorrow at heart;

but hunger forever
urges me onward to eating and drinking, and makes me forget all
things I have suffered, and even commands me to fill it completely.

You should bestir yourselves when the Dawn shows her light in the morning,
setting unfortunate me on the soil of my fathers and homeland,
even though greatly afflicted;

and may I die when I have seen there
all my possessions and slaves and the great high-roofed house I remember.”
Thus did he speak, and they all gave approval and urged that the stranger
quickly be sent to his homeland, because he had spoken with justice.