And there came a public beggar, who used to beg
through the town of Ithaca, notorious for his ravening belly,
eating and drinking without end;

no strength was in him
and no force, but in bulk he was very big to look at.

Arnaeus was his name — his honored mother gave it him
at birth;

but Irus all the young men called him,
because he would run messages whenever anyone bade him.

He came now to drive Odysseus from his own house,
and abusing him he spoke winged words:

"Off the porch, old man — or be dragged off quick by the foot.

Don't you see how they're all winking at me,
telling me to drag you?

I am ashamed to, even so.

Up, then — before our quarrel comes to fists."
Then, glaring from under his brows, Odysseus of the many designs replied:

"Man possessed — I do you no harm, I say you none;

I grudge no one giving to you, however much he takes up.

This threshold will hold the two of us.

You have no need
to grudge what is other men's.

You seem to me a wanderer
just as I am — and prosperity is the gods' to give.

Only do not challenge me too far with your fists, or you will anger me,
and old as I am I will spatter your chest and lips
with blood.

And I would have the more peace for it
tomorrow:

for I do not think you would come back
a second time to the hall of Laertes' son Odysseus."
Then Irus the vagrant answered him in anger:

"Listen to the glutton — how he rattles on,
like an old woman at her oven!

I'll plan him a nasty turn:

hit him with both hands and knock every tooth
from his jaws to the ground, like a crop-raiding sow's.

Belt up now, so all these men may know us
as we fight.

But how would you fight a younger man?"
So, before the high doors, on the polished
threshold, the two of them bristled at each other with whole hearts.

And the sacred strength of Antinous took note of them,
and breaking into easy laughter he called to the suitors:

"Friends — nothing like this has ever happened yet:

what sport the god has brought into this house!

The stranger and Irus are wrangling with each other
to fight it out with fists.

Quick — let us match them!"
So he spoke;

and they all sprang up laughing
and crowded round the ill-dressed beggars.

And Antinous spoke among them, Eupeithes' son:

"Hear me, lordly suitors, while I say a word.

There are goats' paunches lying at the fire, which we set by
for supper, filled with fat and blood.

Whichever of the two wins and proves the better man,
let him stand up and take his pick of them;

and ever after he shall feast with us, and no other
beggar will we let inside to beg among us."
So spoke Antinous, and his word pleased them well.

Then Odysseus of the many designs, with craft in mind, spoke among them:

"Friends, there is no way an old man can fight
a younger one — a man worn down by misery.

But the belly,
that worker of evil, eggs me on, to go down under his blows.

Come then, all of you swear me a strong oath:

that no one, doing Irus a favor, will strike me
a foul blow with a heavy hand, and force me under for him."
So he spoke;

and they all swore the oath as he demanded.

And when they had sworn and sealed the oath entire,
the sacred strength of Telemachus spoke among them:

"Stranger — if your heart and your proud spirit move you
to beat this man off, fear none of the other
Achaeans:

whoever strikes you will have more than one to fight.

Your host is myself;

and the kings second it,
Antinous and Eurymachus, sound-thinking men both."
So he spoke, and they all approved.

And Odysseus
girded his rags about his loins, and bared his thighs —
beautiful, massive — and his broad shoulders came to light,
his chest, his heavy arms.

And Athena
came close and filled out the limbs of the shepherd of the people.