While you were still a boy, you turned shrewder plans than this;

but now that you are grown, come to the measure of manhood,
so that a stranger, looking at your height and beauty,
would say you must be some rich man's son —
your mind and thought are no longer as they should be.

What a thing has been done here in the halls:

you let the stranger be manhandled so!

What now — if a stranger, sitting in our house,
should come to harm from such ugly hauling-about?

On you the shame and the disgrace would fall, among all men."
Then clear-headed Telemachus answered her:

"Mother mine, I cannot resent your anger at this.

But I do take note in my heart, I do know each thing,
the good and the worse alike.

Before, I was still a child.

Yet I cannot manage to think out everything wisely:

these men unhinge me — crowding me this side and that,
plotting their mischief;

and I have no helpers.

Still, the bout of the stranger and Irus did not go
as the suitors intended:

the stranger was the stronger.

If only — father Zeus, Athena, Apollo!

—
the suitors in our house would nod their heads
like that, beaten and broken, some in the courtyard,
some inside the house, and the limbs of each gone slack,
the way that Irus over there at the courtyard gates
sits lolling his head like a man dead drunk,
and cannot stand upright on his feet, or go
home, wherever home is — since his own limbs are slack."
So they spoke to one another of such things.

And Eurymachus addressed Penelope with words:

"Daughter of Icarius, watchful-minded Penelope,
if all the Achaeans through Iasian Argos could see you,
more suitors yet would be feasting in your house
from tomorrow morning:

for you surpass all women
in form and stature, and in the balanced mind within."
Then watchful-minded Penelope answered him:

"Eurymachus, my excellence — my face, my figure —
the deathless ones destroyed the day the Argives
boarded ship for Ilium, and my husband Odysseus with them.

If he came back — if he watched over this life of mine —
my fame would be greater so, and lovelier.

Now I only grieve:

so many evils the god has driven at me.

Truly, when he went, leaving his fathers' land,
he took me by the right hand at the wrist and said:

'Wife — I do not think the strong-greaved Achaeans
will all come home from Troy unharmed and whole:

the Trojans too, they say, are men of war,
spear-throwers, drawers of the bow,
mounters of swift-footed horses — such as decide
soonest the great strife of leveling war.

So I cannot know whether the god will bring me back,
or I go down there in Troy.

Let everything here be your care.

Remember my father and my mother in these halls
as now, or even more, while I am far away.

But when you see our son a bearded man,
marry whom you will, and leave your house behind.'
So he spoke it, that man.

And now it is all being accomplished:

the night will come when the marriage I loathe will meet me —
my cursed self, whose happiness Zeus has torn away.

But this bitter shame comes over my heart and spirit:

this is not what suitors' custom used to be.

Men who would woo a good woman, a rich man's
daughter, and contend with one another for her —
they drive up cattle of their own, and fat sheep,
a feast for the bride's people, and they give her shining gifts.

They do not devour another man's living, scot-free."
So she spoke;

and much-enduring noble Odysseus was glad
that she drew gifts out of them, charming their hearts
with honeyed words, while her mind was bent on other things.

Then Antinous answered her, Eupeithes' son:

"Daughter of Icarius, watchful-minded Penelope,
the gifts — whatever any Achaean wishes to bring here,
accept them:

it is not good manners to refuse a gift.