And the suitors, every one, were amazed beyond all measure,
and a man would say, with a glance at his neighbor:

"Irus un-Irused soon — a self-invited beating!

Look what a thigh the old man shows from under those rags."
So they spoke;

and Irus' heart was stirred — for the worse.

Even so the serving-men girded him and led him out
by force, in terror, the flesh trembling on his limbs.

And Antinous rebuked him, and spoke a word, and named him:

"Better you were not alive, you ox of a braggart, nor ever born,
if you shiver and fear so terribly before this man —
an old man, worn out with the misery that has found him.

But I will tell you this, and it will be accomplished:

if this man beats you and proves the better man,
I will throw you in a black ship and send you to the mainland,
to King Echetus, the maimer of all mankind,
who will slice away your nose and ears with the pitiless bronze
and tear off your parts and give them raw to the dogs to share."
So he spoke;

and a still greater trembling seized Irus' limbs.

But they led him into the middle;

and both men put up their hands.

Then much-enduring noble Odysseus debated
whether to hit him so the life would leave him where he fell,
or to hit him gently and just stretch him on the ground.

And as he weighed it, this seemed to him the better way:

to strike gently, so the Achaeans would not take note of him.

Then both put up their guard;

Irus drove at the right shoulder,
but he struck the neck under the ear, and crushed the bones
inward:

at once the red blood came up in his mouth,
and he went down bleating in the dust, teeth clenched together,
heels drumming the ground.

And the lordly suitors
threw up their hands and died laughing.

Then Odysseus
took him by the foot and dragged him out through the porch
to the courtyard and the colonnade gates;

and there he propped him
against the courtyard fence, sitting up, and pushed his stick into his hand,
and lifting his voice he spoke winged words to him:

"Sit there now, and keep off the pigs and dogs,
and stop lording it over strangers and beggars,
wretch that you are, or a worse evil yet may find you."
He spoke, and slung about his shoulders his beggar's pouch,
full of holes, hanging by a twisted cord,
and went back to the threshold and sat down.

And they went inside
laughing sweetly, and saluted him with words:

"May Zeus give you, stranger, and the other deathless gods,
whatever you most desire, whatever is dear to your heart —
you who stopped that insatiable one from begging
through the land!

For soon we will haul him to the mainland,
to King Echetus, the maimer of all mankind."
So they spoke;

and noble Odysseus rejoiced at the omen of the words.

And Antinous set beside him the great paunch,
filled with fat and blood;

and Amphinomus
took up two loaves from the basket and set them by him,
and pledged him with a golden cup, and said:

"Your health, father stranger!

May happiness be yours
in time to come — though now you are held fast in many evils."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered him:

"Amphinomus — you seem to me a man of good sense,
and such was the father you come from:

I have heard his good name —
Nisus of Dulichium, a brave man and a rich one.

They say you are his son;

and you seem a civil man.

So I will tell you something.

Mark it;

hear me out.

The earth breeds nothing feebler than a man —
of all things that breathe and move on the face of it.

He tells himself he will never suffer evil in time to come,
as long as the gods lend him prowess and his knees are quick;

but when the blessed gods bring hard days too to pass,
these too he bears — unwilling, on an enduring heart.

For such is the mind of men who live on earth:

it is weather — whatever day the father of gods and men brings on.