But we are not going to our lands, nor anywhere else,
until you marry whichever of the Achaeans is best."
So spoke Antinous, and his word pleased them well,
and each man sent a herald off to bring his gifts.

For Antinous he brought a great embroidered robe,
beautiful, and in it were brooches, twelve in all,
of gold, fitted with well-bent clasps.

For Eurymachus one brought a necklace, richly worked
in gold, strung with pieces of amber, bright as the sun.

For Eurydamas two henchmen brought a pair of earrings,
triple-dropped like mulberries;

and much grace glinted from them.

And out of the house of lord Peisander, Polyctor's son,
a henchman brought a neck-band, a jewel of great beauty.

And so one Achaean after another brought his lovely gift.

Then she went up to her upper room, shining among women,
and her handmaids carried the beautiful gifts beside her.

But the men turned to the dance and to lovely song
and took their pleasure there, and waited for evening to come.

And as they took their pleasure, the black evening came upon them.

At once they set up three braziers in the halls
to give them light, and heaped dry kindling round —
long-seasoned, bone-dry, new-split with the bronze —
and mixed in pine-brands.

And turn by turn the slave-women
of enduring-hearted Odysseus kept the flame alive.

And to them
he himself spoke, Zeus-born Odysseus of the many designs:

"Slave-women of Odysseus, of your master so long gone:

go through to the rooms where the honored queen is;

turn the spindle at her side, and cheer her heart,
sitting there in her chamber, or card the wool with your hands.

I will keep up the light for all these men myself.

Even if they choose to wait for fair-throned Dawn,
they will not outlast me.

I am a very patient man."
So he spoke;

and they burst out laughing, glancing at one another.

And fair-cheeked Melantho jeered at him shamefully —
Dolius fathered her, but Penelope brought her up
and cherished her like her own child, and gave her toys to her heart's desire;

yet even so no grief for Penelope touched her mind,
but she slept with Eurymachus, and loved him.

She now jeered at Odysseus with words of abuse:

"You sorry stranger — you must be some kind of half-wit:

you will not go and sleep at the smithy's house,
or some public shed — no, you stand here running your mouth,
bold as brass among all these men, and your heart feels
no fear.

Either the wine has hold of your wits, or your mind
is always of this sort — that is why you babble so idly.

Or are you giddy because you beat that vagrant Irus?

Watch out that no better man than Irus stands up soon,
who will box both sides of your skull with his heavy hands
and send you out of the house all fouled with blood."
Then, glaring from under his brows, Odysseus of the many designs replied:

"One word to Telemachus, you bitch, and I go straight to him now,
for what you are saying — and he will cut you limb from limb on the spot."
So speaking, he set the women scattering in terror:

off they went through the house, and the knees of every one
went slack with fear;

they thought he spoke the truth.

But he took his stand by the burning braziers, tending
the light, and watched them all;

and other things his heart
was pondering deep within — things not destined to fall short.

And Athena would not let the lordly suitors
hold back from heart-stinging outrage — so that pain might sink
still deeper into Laertes' son Odysseus.

So Eurymachus, Polybus' son, began to speak among them,
baiting Odysseus;

and he raised a laugh among his companions:

"Hear me, you suitors of the far-famed queen,
while I say what the heart in my breast commands.