But he stripped himself of his rags, Odysseus of the many designs,
and leapt to the great threshold with the bow and the quiver
full of arrows, and poured out the swift shafts
there at his feet, and spoke among the suitors:

"So:

that contest-past-all-contest is accomplished.

Now for another mark — one no man has ever hit —
and I shall know if I strike it:

if Apollo gives me that glory."
He spoke, and leveled the bitter arrow at Antinous.

And he — he was that instant lifting a beautiful cup,
a golden one, two-eared, turning it in his hands
to drink the wine;

and slaughter was not in his thoughts:

for who would think, among men at dinner, that one man
in the middle of many — however strong he might be —
would bring on him foul death and the black doom?

But Odysseus took aim at his throat, and shot,
and the point went clean on through the soft of the neck.

He sagged to one side;

the cup dropped out of his hand
as the arrow hit;

and at once a thick jet came
up through his nostrils — human blood;

and quick, with a kick,
he shoved the table from him and spilled the food to the floor:

the bread and the roast meats fouled in it.

And the suitors
broke into uproar through the house when they saw the man fallen;

up from their chairs they started, driven through the hall,
eyes darting every way along the well-built walls —
and nowhere was there a shield or a strong spear to seize.

And they raged at Odysseus with words of fury:

"Stranger, you shoot at men — and it will cost you!

No more contests
for you:

now your own sheer destruction is certain.

The man you have killed was the very noblest of the young men
of Ithaca.

For this the vultures will eat you — here."
So each man guessed:

for indeed they thought he had killed
the man unwilling.

The fools — they had not seen it yet:

that on every one of them the cords of death were fastened.

Then, glaring from under his brows, Odysseus of the many designs replied:

"You dogs!

You kept on saying I would never come home again
out of the land of Troy:

and so you sheared away my house,
and lay with my slave-women by force,
and courted my own wife while I was still alive,
fearing neither the gods who hold wide heaven
nor any vengeance of men, to come hereafter.

Now on you — on all of you — the cords of death are fastened."
So he spoke;

and the pale terror took hold of them all,
and every man peered round for a way to escape sheer destruction.

Only Eurymachus found words, and answered him:

"If you are truly Odysseus of Ithaca, come home again,
then all you say is just — all the Achaeans have done,
reckless things in plenty in the hall, in plenty on the land.

But there he lies — the man to blame for everything:

Antinous.

He was the one who set these doings on —
not so much needing the marriage, or wanting it,
but with another purpose, which the son of Cronos never granted:

to be king himself in the land of well-built Ithaca,
and to ambush your son and kill him.

Now he is killed, as was his portion.

You — spare your own
people;

and we hereafter, making it good through the land,
all that has been drunk and eaten in your halls,
each of us bringing a payment of twenty oxen's worth,
will pay you back in bronze and gold, until your heart
is warmed.

Till then, no one could blame your anger."
Then, glaring from under his brows, Odysseus of the many designs replied:

"Eurymachus — not if you handed over all your patrimonies,
everything you now have, and added more from elsewhere,
not even so would I hold my hands back from the killing
before the suitors had paid for the whole trespass.

Now the choice lies before you:

fight me face to face,
or run — whoever can slip his death and doom.

But I do not think one man of you escapes sheer destruction."
So he spoke;