And Melanthius the goatherd went again to the storeroom
to bring out more fine armor.

But the noble swineherd marked him,
and quickly said to Odysseus, standing near:

"Zeus-born son of Laertes, Odysseus of the many devices —
there he goes again, that ruinous man, the one we guessed:

into the storeroom.

Tell me straight out:

do I kill him — if I prove the better man —
or bring him here to you, to pay for the trespasses,
the many, that man has schemed in your house?"
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered him:

"I and Telemachus will hold the lordly suitors
penned inside the hall, rage as they may.

You two:

twist his feet and hands behind him,
throw him into the storeroom, tie boards fast at his back,
make a braided rope fast to him, and haul him
up the tall pillar, up close to the roof-beams —
so that he lives on a long while, suffering hard pains."
So he spoke;

and they listened well and obeyed:

they went to the storeroom — the man inside did not see them —
and there he was, hunting armor in the room's far corner,
while the two of them stood waiting either side of the doorposts.

And as Melanthius the goatherd came over the threshold,
in one hand carrying a beautiful helmet,
in the other a broad shield, an old one, mottled with mildew —
the hero Laertes' shield, which he carried in his young days,
long since laid by, the stitches of its straps rotted out —
the two of them sprang and seized him, and dragged him in by the hair,
and threw him to the floor for all his anguish of heart,
and bound his feet and hands with a heart-grieving knot,
wrenched hard behind him, through and through, as ordered
by Laertes' son, much-enduring noble Odysseus;

then they made a braided rope fast to him, and hauled him
up the tall pillar, up close to the roof-beams.

And taunting him you spoke, Eumaeus the swineherd:

"Now you will keep watch indeed, Melanthius — the whole night through,
stretched out on the sort of soft bed you deserve;

and the early-born one out of Ocean's streams will not
slip past you as she comes, on her golden throne, at the hour
you drive in goats for the suitors, to make their feast in the hall."
So he was left there, racked in the deadly binding;

and the two got into their armor, shut the shining door,
and went back to Odysseus — the deep mind, the shifting counsels.

There they stood, breathing fury:

on the threshold
four men;

inside the hall, many men, and good ones.

And now Athena, daughter of Zeus, came near them,
likened to Mentor in body and in voice.

Odysseus was glad at the sight of her, and said:

"Mentor — beat off ruin!

Remember your old companion,
who did you good service — and you my own age-mate!"
So he spoke, guessing it was Athena, rouser of armies.

And the suitors on their side bellowed through the hall,
Agelaus, Damastor's son, first to threaten her:

"Mentor — don't let Odysseus talk you around
into fighting the suitors and defending him.

For here is how I think our purpose will be accomplished:

when we have killed these two, father and son,
you will be killed with them — for the things you are minded
to do in this hall.

Your own head will pay the price.

And when the bronze has stripped the force from all of you,
everything you own, indoors and out,
we will pool with the goods of Odysseus.

Your sons
we will not let live in your halls;

your daughters
and your true-hearted wife will not walk free in the town of Ithaca."
So he spoke;

and Athena's heart grew angrier yet,
and she lashed Odysseus with words of fury:

"Odysseus — where is your strength gone?

Where is the fight in you —
you who for Helen's sake, the white-armed, the nobly fathered,
nine years on end battled the Trojans without a break
and killed many men in the terrible fighting?