By your counsel the wide-wayed city of Priam was taken!

How is it that now, come home to your own house and goods,
face to face with the suitors, you whimper about being brave?

Here, old friend — stand by me and watch the work,
and learn what kind of man, among enemy fighters,
Mentor, Alcimus' son, is at repaying kindness."
She spoke — and did not yet grant victory outright to either side,
but went on testing the strength and fight
of Odysseus and of his glorious son.

And she herself darted up to the roof-beam of the smoke-stained hall
and perched there — like a swallow, face-on.

Now Agelaus, Damastor's son, rallied the suitors,
with Eurynomus, Amphimedon, Demoptolemus,
Peisander Polyctor's son, and Polybus the shrewd:

for these were far the best of the suitors in prowess,
of all who still lived and fought for their lives —
the rest the bow and the crowding arrows had brought down.

And Agelaus spoke to them all, putting the word to everyone:

"Friends — now this man's invincible hands will stop.

Mentor has left him — after the empty boasting —
and they are alone at the outer doors.

So do not throw your long spears all together:

come — you six throw first, and see if Zeus
will grant that Odysseus be hit, and we win the glory.

The rest are no concern, once that man falls."
So he spoke;

and they all threw as he ordered,
hungry for it.

And Athena made every cast come to nothing:

one man's spear struck the doorpost of the strong-built hall,
another's the close-fitted door itself,
another's ash shaft, heavy with bronze, slammed into the wall.

And when they had weathered the suitors' spears,
much-enduring noble Odysseus began among his men:

"Friends — now it is mine to say it:

throw!

Into the crowd of the suitors — men wild to strip our corpses
on top of the wrongs they did before."
So he spoke;

and they all threw their sharp spears,
aiming straight ahead:

Odysseus killed Demoptolemus;

Telemachus, Euryades;

the swineherd, Elatus;

and the man in charge of the cattle killed Peisander.

All of those together bit the vast floor with their teeth,
and the suitors fell back into the deep of the hall;

and the others charged, and pulled their spears from the corpses.

Again the suitors threw their sharp spears,
hungry for it;

and Athena made the many casts come to nothing:

one man's spear struck the doorpost of the strong-built hall,
another's the close-fitted door itself,
another's ash shaft, heavy with bronze, slammed into the wall.

But Amphimedon caught Telemachus on the wrist —
a graze:

the bronze just broke the surface of the skin;

and Ctesippus, over the shield, scratched Eumaeus
on the shoulder with his long spear:

it skipped and fell to earth.

Then those around Odysseus — the deep mind, the shifting counsels —
threw their sharp spears into the crowd of the suitors:

and this time Eurydamas fell to Odysseus, sacker of cities;

Amphimedon to Telemachus;

Polybus to the swineherd;

and then Ctesippus fell to the man in charge of the cattle,
struck full in the chest;

and he crowed over him:

"Son of Polytherses — you lover of a good jeer!

— never again
give way to your folly and talk big.

Leave the word
to the gods:

they are far stronger than you.

This is your guest-gift in return — to match the ox-hoof
you gave godlike Odysseus once, when he begged through his own hall."
So spoke the herdsman of the spiral-horned cattle.

And Odysseus
wounded Damastor's son, close in, with the long spear;

and Telemachus wounded Leocritus, Evenor's son,
clean in the flank with his spear, and drove the bronze through:

he pitched forward and struck the ground full with his forehead.

And now Athena raised the aegis that wastes mankind,
high from the roof;