But the singer still dodged the black doom — Terpes' son,
Phemius, who sang among the suitors under compulsion.

He stood with the clear lyre in his hands
close by the side-door, and his mind was split two ways:

whether to slip out of the hall to the great altar of Zeus
of the Courtyard, and sit there on the masoned stone
where Laertes and Odysseus had burned so many
thighbones of oxen — or rush forward and clasp Odysseus' knees.

And as he weighed it, this seemed to him the better way:

to take hold of the knees of Laertes' son Odysseus.

So he set the hollow lyre down on the ground
between the mixing-bowl and the silver-studded chair,
and rushed forward himself and caught Odysseus by the knees,
and clasping them in supplication spoke winged words:

"By your knees, Odysseus — respect me, pity me!

On you yourself the grief will fall hereafter, if you kill
a singer — me — who sing for gods and for men.

I am self-taught:

a god has planted in my heart
all the pathways of song;

and I am fit to sing beside you
as beside a god.

Do not be hungry to cut my throat.

And Telemachus would tell you this — your own dear son:

that it was never by my will, never for want of mine,
that I came to your house to sing at the suitors' feasts:

they were more, and stronger — they marched me here by force."
And the sacred strength of Telemachus heard him,
and quickly spoke to his father, standing near:

"Stop!

He is guiltless — do not cut him with the bronze.

And Medon the herald let us save as well, who always
cared for me in our house when I was a child —
unless Philoetius has killed him already, or the swineherd,
or he met you as you stormed along the hall."
So he spoke;

and Medon heard him — a man of sensible mind —
for he lay cowering under a chair, wrapped up
in a fresh-flayed oxhide, dodging the black doom.

Up from under the chair he came at once, stripped off the oxhide,
and rushed forward and caught Telemachus by the knees,
and clasping them in supplication spoke winged words:

"Friend — here I am:

myself!

Hold back, and tell your father,
before in his overmastering strength he cuts me down with the sharp bronze
in his rage at the suitor-men — the men who sheared away
his goods in the halls, and honored you not at all, the fools."
And Odysseus of the many designs smiled at him and said:

"Take heart:

this man has pulled you clear and saved you —
so you may know in your heart, and tell another too,
how doing good outruns doing evil, and by far.

Now out of the hall with you, and sit in the courtyard,
away from the slaughter — you and the singer of many songs —
while I finish in the house the work that I must."
So he spoke;

and the two of them went out of the hall
and sat down by the altar of great Zeus,
peering about on every side, expecting death each moment.

And Odysseus peered through his own house, for any man
still living, hiding there, dodging the black doom.

But he saw them all, the whole count of them, in blood and dust
fallen — so many, like fish that fishermen
have hauled from the gray sea in the mesh of a net
onto the curved beach:

heaped on the sand they lie,
all of them, aching for the waves of the sea,
and the shining Sun takes the life out of them:

so the suitors lay heaped on one another.

Then Odysseus of the many designs said to Telemachus:

"Telemachus — go, call me the nurse Eurycleia,
so I can tell her the word that is on my mind."
So he spoke;

and Telemachus obeyed his dear father,
and rattling the door he called the nurse Eurycleia:

"Up with you, and come, old woman born long ago —
you who are overseer of our serving-women in the halls.

Come:

my father calls you;

he has something to say."
So he spoke;

and for her the word stayed wingless.

She opened the doors of the well-settled halls
and came;