and Telemachus led the way before her.

And she found Odysseus among the bodies of the slain,
spattered with blood and gore, like a lion
that comes from feeding on an ox of the farmstead:

all his chest, and his cheeks on either side,
are bloody, and he is terrible to look in the face:

so was Odysseus spattered — feet, and hands above them.

And she — when she saw the corpses and the sea of blood,
she opened her mouth to raise the cry of triumph:

such a work
she saw accomplished.

But Odysseus checked her, and held her back,
hot as she was, and spoke winged words to her:

"In your own heart rejoice, old woman — and hold it in:

no cries.

It is unholy to glory over slaughtered men.

These men the doom of the gods has broken, and their own ruthless deeds:

for they honored nobody on this earth,
bad man or good, whoever came among them —
and so through their own recklessness they have met an ugly fate.

But come now, name me the women of the halls:

which of them dishonor me, and which are guiltless."
Then the dear nurse Eurycleia answered him:

"Then I will tell you, child, the whole truth of it.

You have fifty serving-women in your halls —
slave-women we have taught to work their work,
to card the wool and to bear the lot of slavery.

Of these, twelve in all have walked the road of shamelessness:

no respect for me — none for Penelope herself.

Telemachus is only newly grown;

his mother
would not let him give commands to the serving-women.

But come — let me climb to the bright upper room
and tell your wife.

Some god has laid a sleep on her."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered her:

"Do not wake her yet.

Tell them to come here —
the women who all this while contrived their shamelessness."
So he spoke;

and the old woman went off down the hall
to carry word to the women and hurry them along.

And he called Telemachus to his side, and the cowherd,
and the swineherd, and spoke winged words to them:

"Begin carrying out the dead, and set the women to it;

and after that, the beautiful chairs and the tables —
have them cleaned with water and porous sponges.

And when you have set the whole house in order,
lead the serving-women out of the strong-built hall
to the spot between the roundhouse and the good courtyard fence,
and cut them down with the long swords, till you have stripped
the life from all of them, and they have forgotten Aphrodite —
the sweetness they took under the suitors, coupling in secret."
So he spoke;

and the women came in a huddle, all of them,
wailing terribly, the big tears streaming down.

First they carried out the corpses of the dead
and laid them under the portico of the well-fenced courtyard,
propping them against each other;

and Odysseus commanded,
hurrying the work himself;

and they carried them out — under force.

And after that they cleaned the beautiful chairs and the tables
with water and porous sponges;

and Telemachus, with the cowherd and the swineherd,
scraped the floor of the strong-founded house
with hoes, and the slave-women carried the scrapings out of doors.

And when they had set the whole hall in order,
they led the serving-women out of the strong-built hall
to the spot between the roundhouse and the good courtyard fence,
and penned them in the narrow place, where there was no way out.

And clear-headed Telemachus began, and spoke among them:

"By no clean death will I take the lives of these —
these who poured their insults on my head,
on my own mother, and slept beside the suitors."
So he spoke;

and he made the cable of a dark-prowed ship
fast to a great pillar, and flung it round the roundhouse,
stretched taut, up high, so no foot could reach the ground.