and their knees went slack where they stood, and their hearts.

And Eurymachus called out among them a second time:

"Friends — this man will not now hold his invincible hands.

He has the polished bow and the quiver:

he will shoot
from the smooth threshold until he has killed us all.

Then let our minds be on battle!

Draw your swords,
put up the tables against the arrows of quick death,
and let us all go at him in one body — see if we can
shove him off the threshold and out of the doors,
then through the town, and the alarm raised at once!

Then this man would soon have shot his last."
So speaking, he drew his sharp sword,
bronze, two-edged, and leapt at him
with a blood-freezing yell.

But in the same instant noble Odysseus
let the arrow fly, and struck his chest beside the nipple,
and drove the swift shaft into his liver.

Out of his hand
the sword dropped to the ground;

he doubled over the table
and crumpled, sprawling across it, and spilled the food to the floor
and the two-eared cup.

His forehead beat the earth
in his heart's agony;

both feet kicked out,
rattling the chair;

and the mist poured down over his eyes.

Then Amphinomus went for glorious Odysseus,
charging him head-on, his sharp sword drawn,
to see if he might give way from the doors.

But Telemachus
was too quick:

he caught him from behind with the bronze spear
square between the shoulders, and drove it through his chest,
and he fell with a crash, and struck the ground full with his forehead.

And Telemachus sprang back, leaving the long-shadowed spear
there in Amphinomus:

for he feared that as he pulled
the long spear out, some Achaean might rush in
and cut him with a sword, or strike him as he stooped.

He ran, and came quickly to his dear father,
and standing close he spoke winged words:

"Father — now I will bring you a shield and two spears
and a helmet all of bronze, fitted to your temples;

and I will arm myself as I go, and give the swineherd
the same, and the cowherd.

Armored is better."
Then Odysseus of the many designs answered him:

"Run — bring them, while I still have arrows to fight with,
or they will force me from the doors, one man alone."
So he spoke;

and Telemachus obeyed his dear father
and went to the storeroom where the famous arms were lying.

He took out four shields, and eight spears,
and four bronze helmets thick with horsehair,
and came carrying them fast to his dear father.

He girded the bronze on his own body first,
and in the same way the two slaves put on the fine armor,
and they took their stand around Odysseus — the deep mind, the shifting counsels.

And he, so long as he had arrows to fight with,
kept aiming, and dropping suitors in his own house,
one man after another:

they fell in heaps.

But when the arrows failed the master archer,
he leaned the bow against the doorpost of the strong-built hall,
to stand there by the shining entrance-wall,
and threw about his shoulders a shield of four hides,
and set on his mighty head a well-made helmet,
horsehair-crested, the plume nodding terror from the top,
and took up two strong spears, headed with bronze.

Now there was a raised side-door in the well-built wall,
and level with the top of the threshold of the strong hall
an exit to a passage, closed with well-fitted boards.

Odysseus set the noble swineherd to watch it,
posted close:

it was the single way out.

And Agelaus spoke to them all, putting the word to everyone:

"Friends — could not someone climb through the side-door
and get word to the people, and the alarm be raised at once?

Then this man would soon have shot his last."
Then Melanthius the goatherd answered him:

"No way, Agelaus, Zeus-nurtured:

the fine gates of the courtyard
are terribly near, and the mouth of the passage is cruel: