Just as the life of a father is welcome and dear to his children,
one who in sickness lies and endures overpowering sorrows,
wasting away for a long time, a hateful divinity haunting,
till to their joy the gods free him at last from the evil affliction,
so did the land and the trees show welcome and dear to Odysseus.

Hard he swam onward, desiring to set both his feet on the dry land.

Yet when as far from the shore as a voice crying loudly can carry,
then he could hear the sea booming against all the teeth of the rock face.

Great waves thundered and broke on the outermost edge of the dry land,
terribly belching, while all of the coast was surrounded with salt spray.

No ship-holding harbor was there and no roadstead afforded;

only projecting headlands and rock teeth and high-rising cliff walls.

Then were Odysseus’ knees unstrung and the heart in his body;

deeply disturbed, he addressed his own great-hearted spirit and told it:

“Sorrow!

Now Zeus lets me see land beyond expectation,
after I finally crossed the whole of this gulf of the sea-way,
yet no escape from the gray-colored water is anywhere shown me.

Sharp-running crags lie offshore, and around them a wave is continually
roaring and churning, while steeply the rock rises upward behind them.

Deep is the sea at the shoreline, and nowhere am I able to stand on
both of my feet and escape from the evil that comes to destroy me.

If I attempt to climb outward, a mountainous wave may seize me,
hurl me against the solid stone, and my struggle be fruitless.

Yet if I swim still further along in the hope of discovering
gently shelving beaches or harbors protected from ocean,
then I am frightened the squall of the storm shall again seize me upward,
carry me heavily groaning across the fish-thronging sea-way;

or some divinity sends a monster against me from salt brine,
one from the swarm that the famous Amphitrite feeds in the sea depth,
since I know how the famous shaker of earth has become hostile to me.”
While in the depth of his mind and his spirit he turned these reflections,
then an enormous wave brought him straight to the jagged-edged shoreline.

There would the skin have been stripped and his bones have been broken asunder,
had not the gray-eyed goddess Athena suggested a counsel.

Lunging ahead, with both of his hands he took hold of the rock face,
clinging and groaning until the enormous wave finally passed him.

Thus he escaped it;

but backward the water came leaping against him,
striking and throwing him far from the land in the midst of the sea-way.

Just as an octopus dragged from the depth of its den in the seafloor
has many pebbles adhering to cups on the ends of its tentacles,
so from the bold hands of the hero the skin was stripped on the rock face;

over his head the enormous wave closed and covered Odysseus.

There before destiny wretched Odysseus surely had perished,
had not the gray-eyed goddess Athena provided him clear sense.

Up from the surf where the water came belching against the dry shoreline,
swimming outside it, he looked to the coast in the hope of discovering
gently shelving beaches or harbors protected from ocean.

Yet when in swimming he came to the mouth of a beautiful river,
there at last did the ground seem best for the man in his judgment,
free of all stones and provided with shelter from wind and the tempest.

Feeling the current that flowed, in the depth of his heart he petitioned:

“Hear me, O lord, whoever you are;

I come much imploring,
fleeing the sea and the threatening anger of lord Poseidon.

Even to gods everlasting a wandering man is held sacred
when he arrives as a fugitive, just as I now have arrived at
both your stream and your knees after suffering many afflictions.