Clothing I give you and send an appropriate wind to your sternward,
so you return to the land of your fathers untouched by affliction,
if this is willed by the gods everlasting who govern broad heaven,
they who in purpose and action are stronger and mightier than I.”
Thus did she speak, and the steadfast and noble Odysseus trembled.

Raising his voice, he addressed her, and these words took wing as he uttered:

“Goddess, you plan something else in this place, not my safe expedition,
telling me I should cross on a raft the tremendous gulf of the sea-way,
terrible, painful, which even the swift and beautifully fitted ships do not
cross, though they take great delight in a favoring wind sent by great Zeus.

Never shall I set foot on a raft if you are unwilling,
not till you bring yourself, goddess, to swear the tremendous oath to me
you do not plan any other affliction or evil against me.”
Thus did he speak, and the radiant goddess Calypso was smiling.

Stroking him there with her hand, she addressed him aloud by his name there:

“Truly you are a deceiver and never unpracticed in cunning,
since you considered and spoke such a careful expression before me.

Witness it now, O Earth and the measureless Heaven above us,
also the downward-dripping water of Styx, the most solemn
oath and the most to be dreaded by gods everlasting in swearing:

I do not plan any other affliction or evil against you.

No, I am thinking and giving the counsel that I would determine
there for myself if a similar need should arise and compel me.

Honest and righteous the mind in my bosom, and never a heart made
out of implacable iron is mine;

it understands pity.”
Thus having spoken, the radiant goddess proceeded before him
rapidly, while in the steps of the goddess he followed her onward.

Both then entered the hollow cave, both goddess and mortal.

He sat down on the chair where Hermes had lately been sitting,
while every kind of the food that mortal humanity eats there
also the drink was brought by the nymph and positioned before him.

She took a seat directly across from the godlike Odysseus;

servants set nectar and heavenly food at the side of the goddess.

Both reached their hands to the excellent food that was ready before them.

Then, when desire for food and for drinking was put from their bodies,
radiant Calypso the goddess began to address lord Odysseus:

“Zeus-born Laertes’ son, resourceful and noble Odysseus,
so you now wish to depart for the well-loved land of your fathers,
straightway, this moment?

Depart, and may joy go beside you regardless.

Yet if you knew in the depth of your heart what abundance of sorrow
fate has appointed for you ere you come to the land of your fathers,
you would remain here with me and would keep this house, being deathless,
even although you long every day to behold your own consort,
she for whose presence you ache with a constant desire in your lifetime.

Yet I declare I am neither inferior to her in appearance
nor in the stature I carry, since never is it appropriate
mortal women compete with immortals in bodily form or in beauty.”
Then the resourceful Odysseus answered the goddess and told her:

“Goddess and queen, do not now be angry with me;

I understand it.

Well do I know that the thoughtful and steadfast Penelope does not
equal your stature or beauty to look on, but is far beneath you,
since she is mortal and you are immortal and free of all aging.

Still I desire and I long every day of my whole life to travel
homeward and finally look on the day of my homeward returning.

If some god on the wine-colored sea should again bring me shipwreck,
still I shall bear it, the heart in my bosom experienced in sorrow.

Much I have suffered already and labored in waves and in battle;