Zeus now commands you to send that man on his journey, and quickly.

It is not fated for him to die here afar from his people;

still it is fated for him to behold his friends and arrive at
home with its high-built roof and the country and land of his fathers.”
Thus did he speak, and the radiant goddess Calypso was trembling.

Raising her voice, she addressed him, and these words took wing as she uttered:

“Pitiless gods, more jealous than every being beside you!

You feel resentment when goddesses openly sleep beside mortal
men, if a goddess should take one to be her beloved husband.

So when the rose-fingered Dawn took Orion to be her companion,
you who are gods living free of affliction resented her pleasure,
till in Ortygia the chaste gold-throned goddess Artemis found him,
coming against him with gentle arrows and killing him swiftly.

So when Demeter the goddess with beautiful hair obeyed her
heart and in love lay down by Iasion there in the furrow,
fallow ground plowed three times, it was not long hidden from great Zeus,
who with a cast of the glittering lightning destroyed him completely.

So now, gods everlasting, you grudge me a mortal companion.

I was the one who delivered him, riding astride of the keel there,
after the lightning of Zeus had struck his swift-running vessel,
splitting it there in the midst of the sea with its wine-colored water.

There all the rest of his excellent traveling comrades were ruined,
while to this island the wind and the wave carried only Odysseus.

I gave him love and nourishment there, and I promised to make him
deathless and free from the withering touch of old age all his lifetime.

Yet no other god can evade or bring to frustration
any intention of Zeus who possesses and carries the aegis.

Let the man go, if Zeus now urges and gives the commandment,
over the desolate sea;

but I shall not be his conveyor.

No ships with their oars are beside me and no companions
able to carry him over the broad and enormous back of the sea-way.

Yet with a willing heart I shall counsel him, hiding no knowledge,
so he returns to the land of his fathers untouched by affliction.”
Then the guide and the slaughterer of Argus replied to the goddess:

“Send him away in this manner, and guard against angering great Zeus,
lest he should turn afterward in his wrath and bring punishment on you.”
Thus having spoken, the powerful slaughterer of Argus departed.

Then the queenly nymph went seeking the great-hearted lord Odysseus,
once she had heard and attended the messenger sent her from great Zeus.

There on the shore she found him;

his eyes were continually tearful,
never were dry, while the sweetness of life kept draining away in
grief for the homeward return, since the nymph no longer could please him.

True, in the nighttime he slept by her side, for she forced him to do so,
there in the hollow caves, an unwilling man by a willing goddess;

yet in the daytime he sat on the rocks and the beaches around them,
rending the heart in his bosom with tears and with groaning and sorrow,
gazing across the desolate sea while the tears still fell downward.

Standing beside him, the radiant goddess addressed him and told him:

“Sorrowful man, do not grieve here longer or let your existence
waste itself further away;

I am ready entirely to send you.

Come now, cut long timbers and fasten with bronze the broad structure
of a raft, and construct on its surface a high-rising half-deck,
so it may carry you over the mist-covered face of the sea-way.

Bread I shall set in the vessel and water and red-colored wine there,
all to your heart’s satisfaction, to keep off the pain of your hunger.