like a round shield they appeared to him over the mist-covered sea-way.

Yet the strong shaker of earth, returning from Ethiopians,
saw him from far off out of the mountains of Solyma;

plainly
visible there he sailed, and the god grew angrier in spirit.

Shaking his head, he addressed his own heart and considered the matter:

“Curse it!

The gods have surely revised their intentions concerning
lord Odysseus while I remained with the Ethiopians.

Here he is close to the Phaeacian country where fate has appointed
he shall escape from the final noose of the pain that has bound him.

Still I declare I shall drive him deep enough into affliction.”
Thus having spoken, he gathered the clouds and stirred up the sea-way,
grasping his trident;

and every squall of the winds he awakened,
every direction, and covered both land and the sea with the storm cloud;

night rose suddenly upward and outward from heaven’s expanses.

East Wind and South Wind fell on him together and hard-blowing West Wind,
also the clear-born North Wind rolling a mountainous wave there.

Then were Odysseus’ knees unstrung and the heart in his body;

deeply disturbed, he addressed his own great-hearted spirit and told it:

“Sorrowful man that I am!

What happens to me at the ending?

Now I am frightened the goddess revealed everything without error,
saying that I on the sea, ere I came to the land of my fathers,
must fill my measure of pains, and it all is coming to fullness.

See how Zeus crowns all of the breadth of the heaven with storm cloud,
stirring the sea, while the squalls of the whole of the winds are assailing,
every direction;

and now my destruction is altogether certain.

Three times blessed were the Danaans, four times blessed, who were slaughtered
in those years in broad Troy, doing kindness to Atreus’ two sons!

Would that I too had died there and met my allotted destruction,
there on the day when innumerable Trojans were casting
bronze-headed spears at my body above the dead offspring of Peleus.

Then I had won full rites for my death and Achaeans had carried my glory;

now it is fated I die by a miserable form of destruction.”
Just as he spoke, an enormous wave came rushing from high up,
terribly driving upon him and whirling the raft in a circle.

Far from the raft he was thrown, and the steering oar from his fingers
flew, while the mast was snapped in the middle by terrible tempest,
winds from every direction converging and striking together;

far off into the water the sail and the yard were carried.

Long underneath the water the wave held the suffering hero;

swiftly he could not arise from beneath the enormous wave’s downrush,
since he was burdened with clothes that the radiant Calypso had given.

Yet in the end he rose and spat from his mouth bitter salt brine,
streaming abundantly down from the crown of his head in great torrents.

Yet even so, though exhausted, he never forgot the raft body;

lunging amid the waves, he caught hold of its timbers and mounted,
sitting himself in the midst and evading the ending of death there.

Great waves carried it here and there in the force of the current.

Just as the northern wind in the autumn bears thistledown over
open plains, while the clusters are clinging securely together,
so the winds carried it here and there over open seawater.

Now the South Wind tossed it across to the North Wind to carry,
now in his turn East Wind surrendered the raft to the West Wind.

Then she perceived him, the beautiful-ankled daughter of Cadmus,
Ino the White Goddess, once a mortal with mortal expression,
now in the depths of the salt sea sharing the honor of godhead.

She took pity on lord Odysseus, driven and worn by affliction;