taking the form of a shearwater, up from the sea she came flying,
perched on the close-fitted raft and addressed him and gave him instruction:

“Sorrowful man, why has earth-shaking lord Poseidon become so
terribly hostile to you, that he plants such a harvest of evil?

Still he shall not destroy you, although his fury is raging.

Do as I tell you exactly, for you do not seem without wisdom.

Strip off the clothing you wear and abandon the raft to the windstorm;

strike out swimming by force of your hands on the homeward return to
land of Phaeacians, where it is fated you flee from destruction.

Here, spread this deathless veil underneath the breadth of your chest now.

It is immortal;

you need not fear any pain or destruction.

Yet at the moment your hands have taken a hold upon dry land,
loosen it once more and cast it afar in the wine-colored sea-way,
far from the land, and turn your face in the opposite quarter.”
Thus having spoken, the goddess presented the veil to Odysseus;

then she herself sank back underneath the turbulent sea swell,
taking the form of a shearwater;

dark-colored waves closed above her.

Then the steadfast and noble Odysseus thought of the matter;

deeply disturbed, he addressed his own great-hearted spirit and told it:

“Sorrow!

I fear some immortal is weaving another deception,
telling me I must leave my raft and surrender it wholly.

No, I shall not yet obey, for afar with my own eyes
I saw the land where the goddess declared that my refuge awaited.

This I shall do, since it seems in my mind to be greatly the best thing:

while all the timbers continue to hold in the fastenings firmly,
so long I stay on the raft and endure the afflictions upon it;

yet at the moment the wave has broken the raft into pieces,
then I shall swim, since no better counsel appears to my thinking.”
While in the depth of his mind and his spirit he turned these reflections,
earth-shaking lord Poseidon uplifted a mountainous wave there,
terrible, savage, and arching above him, and hurled it upon him.

Just as a turbulent wind tosses up a dry pile of chaff there,
scattering all of the wisps in one direction and other,
so it scattered the long raft timbers;

but lord Odysseus
mounted astride of a single beam like a man on a racehorse,
stripping away the clothes that the radiant Calypso had given.

Straightway under his chest he spread out the veil of the goddess,
plunged headfirst in the sea with his arms spread wide for the swimming,
eager to swim;

and the powerful shaker of earth then perceived him.

Shaking his head, he addressed his own heart and considered the matter:

“So now suffer abundant afflictions and drift in the sea-way,
till you arrive at the people whom Zeus has nurtured and favored.

Still I imagine you shall not make little of all your affliction.”
Thus having spoken, he lashed the beautiful-maned team of horses,
coming to Aegae, the place where his glorious dwelling is founded.

Yet the gray-eyed goddess Athena devised a new counsel.

All of the pathways of all other winds she bound fast and securely,
ordering every wind to lie down and to slumber in stillness.

Only the rapidly blowing North she aroused and broke wave-crests,
so that illustrious Zeus-born Odysseus might reach the oar-loving
people Phaeacian, fleeing the doom that is death and destruction.

Two nights long and two whole days on the densely packed sea swell
there he was driven, and often his heart looked straight at destruction.

Yet when the beautiful-haired Dawn brought the third day upon him,
then at last the wind lay down, and a calm without wind was
spread;

and he suddenly saw the land very near to his body,
sharply observing ahead as a mountainous wave raised him upward.