Yet when he reached that faraway island and came to its shore there,
out from the violet-colored water he stepped onto dry land,
onward he went till he came to the mighty cave where the goddess
nymph with the beautiful hair made her dwelling, and found her within it.

There on the hearth an enormous fire was blazing, and fragrance
carried afar from the burning and split cedar wood and the citron,
filling the island.

Within, the goddess sang beautifully, moving
back and forth by the loom as she wove with a shuttle of gold-work.

High and luxuriant forest had grown all around the great cavern:

alder and black-colored poplar and sweet-scented cypress together.

There the long-winged birds of the air were accustomed to roosting,
little horned owls and hawks and the crows of the sea with long tongues there,
all who continually take their employment and food from the water.

Over the hollow cave a flourishing vine had been trained there,
grown to its prime and abundantly heavy with clusters of grapes now.

Four flowing springs in a row poured out their crystalline water,
close to each other, though each was directed along its own pathway.

Soft-colored meadows of violets and wild celery round them
blossomed;

and even a god everlasting arriving among them
would look on in astonishment there and be gladdened in spirit.

There stood the guide who had slaughtered Argus and gazed in amazement.

Then, when his heart had been filled with delight in the whole of the vision,
straightway into the broad cave he entered;

and radiant Calypso,
shining among the goddesses, knew who he was when she saw him.

Gods everlasting are never unknown to each other in meeting,
even if one makes his dwelling afar from the rest of immortals.

Yet he did not discover the great-hearted lord Odysseus
there, for the man sat weeping as always he sat on the seashore,
rending the heart in his bosom with tears and with groaning and sorrow,
gazing across the desolate sea while the tears still fell downward.

Radiant Calypso, the goddess, inquired of Hermes and asked him,
seating him there in a chair that was beautifully bright in its shining:

“Why have you come to me, Hermes who carries the gold wand, my honored
guest and beloved?

You never before were accustomed to visit.

Tell what you hold in your mind, for my heart is determined to do it,
if I have power to do it, and if it is able to be done.

Yet come inside in the first place and let me set food there before you.”
Thus having spoken, the goddess drew up a table beside him,
heaping ambrosia over it, mixing the red-colored nectar.

Then the guide and the slaughterer of Argus was drinking and eating.

After the god had partaken of food and encouraged his spirit,
then he replied to the goddess in words and gave answer directly:

“Goddess, you ask me, a god, why I come, and I shall not conceal it;

all I shall tell you in truth, since you have commanded the answer.

Zeus ordered me to come here, though I had no desire for the journey.

Who by his choice would cross such a measureless distance of salt sea,
past all description, where no mortal city is near us to offer
either the victims that please all the gods or appropriate hecatombs?

Yet no other god can evade or bring to frustration
any intention of Zeus who possesses and carries the aegis.

He says a man lives beside you, the most wretched warrior
out of the heroes who fought nine years round Priam’s city,
sacked it at last in the tenth and departed to sail for his homeland.

Yet on the homeward journey they sinned against goddess Athena,
who stirred a terrible wind and enormous waves of the sea-way.

There all the rest of his excellent traveling comrades were ruined,
while to this island the wind and the wave carried only Odysseus.