Pity me, lord, for I call and declare myself now your suppliant.”
Thus did he speak, and the god stayed the current and held back the wave there,
calming the water before him and bringing him safe to the river’s
mouth.

He bent both his knees and let both of his powerful hands fall;

utterly crushed by the sea was the heart in the depth of his bosom.

All of his flesh was swollen, and seawater streamed from his body,
running in torrents from mouth and nostrils;

without breath or speech there
down he lay, barely living, and terrible weariness seized him.

Yet when at last he recovered his breath and his spirit was gathered,
then from his body he loosened the veil of the goddess and cast it
into the seaward-flowing river;

an enormous wave bore it
backward and down on the current, and Ino immediately took it
into her well-loved hands.

From the river Odysseus turned then,
sank in the reeds, and he kissed the grain-giving breadth of the plowland.

Deeply disturbed, he addressed his own great-hearted spirit and told it:

“Sorrow!

What happens to me?

What shall come at the end of my struggle?

If I keep anxious watch through the night by the side of the river,
cold that is evil together with dew that is soaking may finish
me, since I have no strength and my spirit is gasping and weary;

while toward the dawn cold wind blows out from the stream of the river.

Yet if I climb this slope to the shade of the forest and settle
down in the densely grown brush, if the cold and the weariness leave me,
letting the sweetness of sleep come over my body and hold me,
then I am frightened wild beasts shall make me their spoil and their carrion.”
Yet as he weighed it, this seemed in his mind to be greatly the better.

Up to the forest he went and discovered it close to the water,
there on a rise in the clearing;

he crept underneath double thicket,
two trees sprung from a single stock, one wild and one cultivated.

Neither the force of the moist-blowing winds could penetrate through them,
nor could the shining sun strike through with the light of its sunbeams,
nor could the rain soak through, for the two trees were densely entangled,
each interlaced with the other.

Beneath them the lord Odysseus
crept and immediately heaped up a broad bed there with his strong hands,
since an abundant drift of the leaves that had fallen was lying,
ample to cover and shelter two men, or even three mortals,
there in the winter season, although the weather were bitter.

Seeing the bed, the steadfast and noble Odysseus rejoiced there,
lay in the midst, and poured the abundance of fallen leaves over him.

Just as a man in a pile of the dark-colored ashes will bury
one burning log at the furthest edge of his fields, with no neighbors,
saving the seed of the fire so he need not seek it from elsewhere,
so in the leaves did Odysseus bury himself;

and Athena
poured sleep over his eyes, to release him as quickly as might be
out of his toil-worn weariness, closing his well-loved eyelids.