Dawn from the bed where she rested beside the lordly Tithonus
rose, bearing light to the gods everlasting and mortal humanity.

Gods were assembling and taking their seats in the place of their council,
Zeus high-thundering among them, whose power is greatest of all gods.

There gray-eyed Athena recounted the many cares of Odysseus,
thinking of him, for it grieved her he stayed in the house of the sea nymph:

“Father Zeus, and you blessed immortals who live without dying,
never again let a scepter-bearing king be gentle and kindly,
never let one in his heart understand the appropriate justice;

let him be harsh in his dealings instead and commit every outrage,
since not one of the people remembers the godlike Odysseus,
subjects he governed as king, though he was as gentle as father.

Now on an island he lies and endures overpowering sorrows,
there in the halls of Calypso the nymph, who continues to hold him
forcibly there, and he cannot return to the land of his fathers,
since no ships with their oars are beside him and no companions
able to carry him over the broad and enormous back of the sea-way.

Now there are men who intend to murder his well-beloved son
during his homeward journey;

he sailed out in search of his father,
going to sacred Pylos and shining Lacedaemon.”
Then cloud-gathering Zeus made answer and spoke to Athena:

“Child of my blood, what word has escaped from the fence of your tooth-row?

Did you yourself not frame this counsel and plan it beforehand,
how on returning Odysseus should punish the men for their outrage?

Guide young Telemachus now with your skill, for you have the power,
so he returns to the land of his fathers untouched by affliction,
while in their vessel the suitors return with no deed accomplished.”
Thus having spoken, he turned to the well-loved son Hermes and told him:

“Hermes, since you are messenger also in all other matters,
tell to the nymph with the beautiful hair our unalterable counsel:

steadfast Odysseus now shall return from his long deprivation,
having no escort of gods everlasting or mortal humanity.

Suffering pain on a raft made of timbers securely united,
he on the twentieth day shall arrive at the rich land Scheria,
country of godlike Phaeacians, whose lineage is close to immortals.

They in the depth of their hearts shall honor the man like a god there,
send him away in a ship to the well-loved land of his fathers,
giving him clothing abundant and bronze and gold for his treasure,
more than Odysseus ever had carried away from the Trojan
country if safe he had come with the fair share allotted in plunder.

So it is fated for him to behold his friends and arrive at
home with its high-built roof and the country and land of his fathers.”
Thus did he speak, and the guide who had slaughtered Argus obeyed him.

Straightway under his feet he fastened the beautiful sandals,
golden and deathless, that carry him over the breadth of the water,
also the measureless land, with the rushing and breath of the windstorm.

Then he took hold of the wand with which he enchants human eyelids,
those he desires, and awakens again other men from their sleeping.

Holding it firmly, the powerful slaughterer of Argus was flying.

Down on Pieria first he alighted, then dropped to the sea-way,
skimming along on the surface of waves in the form of a shearwater,
one that across the tremendous troughs of the desolate sea-way
hunts for the fish and repeatedly wets its wings in the salt brine.

Such was the manner that Hermes rode over crowding wave-crests.