let this affliction be added to all the afflictions that came first.”
Thus he spoke, while the sun sank down and the twilight descended.

Into the innermost hollow of cavern the two then proceeded,
taking delight in the pleasure of love and remaining together.

When Dawn in her earliness rose with her rose-colored fingers,
straightway the lord Odysseus clothed himself in mantle and tunic.

She, the divine nymph, put on a silvery mantle around her,
finely and gracefully woven, and fastened around her a beautiful
girdle of gold, then covered the crown of her head with a veil there.

Then she considered the sending away of the great Odysseus.

Into his palms she fitted a massive ax for his labor,
fashioned of bronze and sharpened alike on each side of the ax head,
fitted with beautiful handle of olive wood, solid and well made.

Then she presented a smoothly polished adze and conducted
him to the island’s furthest extreme, where the tallest trees flourished:

alder and black-colored poplar and fir trees touching the heavens,
long ago dried and seasoned, and light for his sailing on water.

After she showed him the place where all of the tallest trees flourished,
radiant Calypso returned to her home and abandoned him working.

He began cutting the timber, and work went swiftly before him.

Twenty trees altogether he felled, then trimmed with the bronze blade,
skillfully smoothed them all and made straight by the line of the builder.

Meanwhile radiant Calypso the goddess brought augers before him;

through every timber he bored and fitted one closely to other,
fastening all with the mortising craft and the pegs of the builder.

Wide as the curving hull of a broad and burdened merchantman
measured by one who is thoroughly skilled in the craft of construction,
so broadly did Odysseus make and construct the raft body.

Half-decks he set in their place and attached to the close-fitted cross ribs,
finishing all with the long-running planks that would serve as the gunwales.

Therein he fashioned a mast and a yard that was fitted upon it;

also he fashioned a steering oar that would hold to the course there.

All from the stern to the bow he surrounded with braided willow
barriers warding the wave and abundant brush used for ballast.

Meanwhile radiant Calypso brought cloth for the making of sailcloth,
which he constructed as well with the skill and the craft he possessed there,
fastening braces and halyards and sheets in their places securely.

Then with his levers he hauled the raft to the glittering salt sea.

This was the fourth day, and all of the work had been brought to completion.

There on the fifth day radiant Calypso dispatched him,
bathing his body and clothing him there in sweet-smelling garments.

One skin dark with the wine the goddess provided aboard it,
also another and greater for water, provisions in leather
sack, and abundant comforting meats for the wearisome journey.

Then she provided a wind blowing harmless and warm from behind him.

Glad in the wind, the noble Odysseus spread out the sailcloth,
skillfully guiding the raft with the steering oar in his two hands,
seated;

and never did sleep come down on his eyes for the nighttime,
watching the Pleiades, watching Boötes late in his setting,
watching the Bear that is known to humanity also as Wagon,
turning in place and continually watching the hunter Orion,
only the starry formation that never bathes in the ocean.

Radiant Calypso the goddess had given him careful instruction
he should keep this on the left of his hand while he traveled the sea-way.

Seventeen days he continued to sail, making way over water.

Then on the eighteenth day the shadowy mountains appeared there,
mountains of the Phaeacian country, the part that was closest;