The Odyssey — Book 3

Pylos: Nestor's tales of the returns; Telemachus rides for Sparta.

Now from the beautiful water rose Helios, suddenly leaping
up to the brazen expanse of the sky, there to shine for immortals
and for the mortals who live on the grain-giving breadth of the plowland.
Into the strong-built city of Neleus, Pylos, they entered.
There by the shore of the sea, all the people were making an offering,
black-colored bulls, to the dark-haired shaker and lord of the earthways.
Nine were the companies seated, five hundred men in every company;
nine were the bulls that were standing in front of each gathered division.
Just as they tasted the innards and burned the thighbones for godhead,
when they came straight into the harbor; they brailed the symmetrical vessel's
sails and furled them above, moored the ship, and themselves disembarked there.
Young Telemachus left the ship, with Athena proceeding before him.
First the gray-eyed goddess Athena addressed him and gave him instruction:

“Young Telemachus, now you have no further need to be bashful,
not in the least; for precisely because of this purpose you sailed here,
seeking your father, to learn where the earth has concealed him and what doom
met him. Go straight to the horse-breaking Nestor and stand there before him.
Let us discover the counsel concealed in the depths of his bosom.
Ask him yourself, so that he may reveal the infallible true word.
No lie shall come from his mouth, for his mind is exceedingly prudent.”

Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:

“Mentor, how shall I go to the man, and with what words shall I greet him?
Still I am little experienced in the elaborate art of discussion,
and a young man is embarrassed to question a man who is older.”

Then the gray-eyed goddess Athena addressed him a second time, saying:

“Young Telemachus, some words your own understanding shall show you,
others a god shall suggest; for I do not imagine you entered
life or were nurtured apart from the gods’ everlasting affection.”

Thus having spoken, Athena proceeded ahead of him swiftly;
close in the steps of the goddess he followed her onward and swiftly.
Into the place of assembly they came, to the rows of the Pylians.
Nestor was seated there with his sons, and around them companions
readied the feast, some roasting the meat, while the others were skewering.
Then, when the gathering noticed the strangers, they came in a body,
clasping their hands in a welcome and asking the two to be seated.
First Peisistratus, Nestor's son, as he came up before them,
took them both by the hand and invited them into the banquet,
seating them there on the soft woolen fleeces that covered the seashore,
close by his brother Thrasymedes and Nestor his father.
Portions of innards he gave them and poured out the wine for their drinking
into a cup made of gold, and he pledged her and spoke in salutation
there to Athena, the daughter of Zeus who possesses the aegis:

“Stranger, begin now by praying to lordly Poseidon the sea-god,
since his is the banquet upon which you came when you entered.
Then, when you pour him libation and pray in the customary manner,
give to this other man also the cup of the honey-sweet vintage,
so he may pour, for I think he too makes prayer to immortals.
All human beings have need of the gods who are living forever.
Yet he is younger, the same age as I in the order of seasons;
therefore to you do I first give the beautiful cup made of gold here.”

Thus he spoke and set in her hand the cup of the honey-sweet vintage.
Joy filled Athena because of the thoughtful and equitable young man,
since in her hand before anyone else's he placed the gold vessel.
Straightway she prayed at considerable length to the lordly Poseidon: