“I shall reveal to you, child, every part of the truth without error.

You have already imagined yourself how the story would happen,
if Menelaus, the fair-haired son born of Atreus, coming
home out of Troyland, had found that Aegisthus alive in the palace.

No man would heap up a mound of the earth on the dead man's remains then;

carrion birds and the dogs would have torn and devoured him together,
lying out there on the plain, far away from the streets of the city.

Not one Achaean woman would mourn him;

his deed was a horror.

We were away in the country of Troy, winning many a war-prize,
while in the horse-grazing country of Argos he lingered in comfort,
working on Agamemnon's wife all the time with his flattering language.

First she rejected the shameful affair and resisted the schemer,
radiant Clytemnestra, for sound understanding was still hers.

There at her side was a singer, to whom the great son born of Atreus,
sailing for Troy, gave strictest command to look after his consort.

Yet when the destiny sent by the gods finally bound her to ruin,
then to a desolate island Aegisthus conveyed the poor singer,
leaving him there to become both the spoil and the prey of the winged ones.

Willing, he brought the now-willing woman to live in his household.

Many the thighs that he burned for the gods upon sanctified altars,
many the gifts that he hung, woven fabric and glittering gold-work,
after accomplishing what in his heart he had never expected.

Now on our journey from Troy we had sailed in the company of each other,
I and the son born of Atreus, joined in affectionate friendship.

Yet when we came to the sacred headland of Athens at Sunium,
Phoebus Apollo approached with the gentle shafts of his arrows,
striking and killing the steersman who guided the ship of Menelaus,
still with the steering oar of the fast-running ship in his two hands,
Phrontis, the son of Onetor, who far outperformed human peoples
steering a ship when the violent storm winds descended upon it.

Thus Menelaus was held in that place, though he hastened his journey,
burying there his companion and giving the rites that were proper.

Then, when he too went on over wine-colored seas in the hollow
ships and in rapidity came to precipitous Malea's summit,
Zeus of the wide voice planned for him there an abhorrent road homeward,
pouring the breath of the screaming and turbulent winds on his vessels,
mountainous waves that enormously swelled on the face of the sea-way.

There he divided the fleet, driving part to the island of Crete-land,
where the Cydonians lived by Iardanus' river and waters.

There a sheer cliff with a smooth face descends to the salt sea below it,
there at the edge of the Gortynian land on the mist-covered sea-way,
where the South Wind drives a great wave toward the headland on leftward,
facing toward Phaestus, while one little rock holds the great wave back.

There some ships landed, and barely the men could escape from destruction,
though on the reef all the vessels were smashed by the waves of the sea-way.

Five other ships with their dark-colored prows were together transported,
carried by wind and the water and grounded upon the Egyptian shorelands.

Thus Menelaus, collecting abundant possessions and gold-work,
wandered by ship through the countries of people whose languages differed.

Meanwhile Aegisthus devised those abominable deeds in the homeland.

Seven whole years he reigned over Mycenae abundant in gold-work,
having killed Atreus' son, while the people submitted beneath him.

Then in the eighth year noble Orestes returned as his evil,
home out of Athens, and killed the assassin who slaughtered his father,
crooked in counsel Aegisthus, who murdered his glorious father.