Thus he spoke, and at once every person was busily working.
Up from the plain came the heifer; and out of the swift-running vessel
came the companions who followed the great-hearted young Telemachus.
Then came the smith with the brazen utensils, the means of his craftwork,
anvil and hammer and well-fashioned tongs that he used in the firelight,
all of the tools that he worked with the gold; and Athena approached them,
there to receive her due offering. Nestor, the old man and horseman,
gave him the gold, and the goldsmith hammered and poured it around the
horns of the heifer, so that the goddess might see and be gladdened.
Stratius and noble Echephron led by the horns the young heifer.
Out of the storeroom Aretus came with the cleansing water,
carried in one hand inside of a basin adorned with flower-work,
while in the other he carried the barley; there stood Thrasymedes,
steadfast in battle, with keen-edged ax in his hand for the slaughter.
Perseus held up the blood bowl. Then Nestor, the old man and horseman,
started with water for hands and the barley, and prayed to Athena
long, making first dedication and casting head-hairs in the firelight.
Then, when their prayers had been made and the scattering barley was thrown down,
straightway the son born of Nestor, the high-hearted lord Thrasymedes,
stood by the heifer and struck; and the ax-blade severed the sinews
there in the neck and relaxed all her strength. Then the women cried loudly—
daughters of Nestor together with wives of his sons and his honored
wife Eurydice, the eldest-born daughter of noble Clymenus.
Then from the earth with its wide roads lifting the heifer, they held her;
and Peisistratus, leader of men, cut the throat of the heifer.
Then, when the black blood ran and the life left all of the bones there,
rapidly breaking the body apart, they cut out the thighbones,
all in the customary way, and they wrapped them abundantly in fat,
doubling layers and laying the raw meat upon them in pieces.
Nestor burned these on split pieces of wood, pouring fire-colored wine there;
young men beside him were holding the forks that were five-pointed upward.
Then, when the thighs had been thoroughly burned and the innards were tasted,
slicing the rest into pieces, they fastened the pieces on skewers,
roasted it all while they held the sharp-pointed spits in their own hands.
Meanwhile the beautiful Polycaste had bathed young Telemachus—
she was the youngest-born daughter of Nestor, the offspring of Neleus.
Then, when she bathed him and richly anointed his body with olive oil,
she put a beautiful mantle around him together with tunic.
Out of the bath he emerged in his body resembling immortals,
went and sat down by Nestor, the shepherd and ruler of peoples.
After the outermost meat had been roasted and taken from firelight,
down they sat and partook of the feast, while excellent men came to serve them,
pouring the wine for their drinking in beautiful vessels of gold-work.
Then, when desire for food and for drinking was put from their bodies,
Gerenian Nestor the horseman began to address the assembly:

“Come, my sons, and the beautiful-maned horses yoke for Telemachus,
leading them under the chariot, so he may make his departure.”