“Dear child, since you yourself have recalled this affair in your speaking,
word comes to me that numerous men who are courting your mother
fill up the halls in despite of your will and are plotting their evil.
Tell me, do you submit of your own free will to oppression,
or do the people throughout the land, at a god's prompting, hate you?
Who can be certain the man shall not one day return and requite their
violence, either alone or together with all the Achaeans?
Would that the gray-eyed goddess Athena might choose so to love you,
just as she cared in the days long ago for the glorious hero Odysseus
there in the country of Troy, where Achaeans endured their afflictions.
Never have I seen gods show love to a man so directly,
just as Athena the goddess stood plainly beside that Odysseus.
If she should choose to adore you like that and attend you in spirit,
more than one man would entirely lose every thought of the marriage.”

Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:

“Elder, I think no fulfillment shall ever be made of that language.
Far too great is the thing that you say, and amazement has seized me.
Never could I hope it happens, not even if gods should desire it.”

Then the gray-eyed goddess Athena addressed him a second time, saying:

“Young Telemachus, what kind of word has escaped from your tooth-fence?
Easily godhead, if willing, can bring a man safely from far lands.
I would prefer to endure an abundance of troubles beforehand,
then to return to my home and behold my appointed homecoming,
rather than come to my hearth and be killed, as the king Agamemnon
died through the treacherous schemes of Aegisthus and even his own wife.
Yet from the death that is common to all, not even immortals
can shield a man they love when the destined occasion arrives and
ruinous death, laying mortals low, overtakes him and holds him.”

Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:

“Mentor, no longer let us speak of him, notwithstanding our sorrow.
No true return any longer remains for my father; the deathless
gods long ago have devised his destruction and black-colored death-doom.
Now there is something else that I wish to inquire and discover
here from old Nestor, for he above others knows justice and wisdom.
Three generations of men, people say, he has governed as ruler;
therefore in looking upon him I seem to behold an immortal.
Nestor, the son of great Neleus, tell me the whole of the true thing:
how did the wide-ruling son of great Atreus die, Agamemnon?
Where was the king Menelaus? What death did the treacherous schemer,
crooked in counsel Aegisthus, devise for a man who was better?
Was Menelaus not there in Achaean Argos, but roving
somewhere among other mortals, that this man took heart and then killed him?”

Then Gerenian Nestor the horseman replied to him, saying: