Coming to Tenedos, victims we offered the gods everlasting,
longing for home;

but no thought of returning was yet in Zeus' spirit.

Iron of heart, he awakened a second malignant contention.

Some wheeled around their curving ships and returned on the sea-way,
those with Odysseus, war-seasoned lord of the manifold counsels,
once more offering favor to Agamemnon, the son born of Atreus.

I with the company close-gathered ships that were following after
fled ever onward, because I perceived a divinity scheming.

Tydeus' warlike son also fled and aroused his companions.

Late in our wake came the fair-haired hero, the lord Menelaus,
catching us there upon Lesbos, debating the lengthy sea-crossing:

whether to sail on the seaward side of precipitous Chios,
passing the island of Psyria, keeping Chios leftward,
or on the landward side of Chios, past wind-shaken Mimas.

Then we petitioned the god for a sign, and a sign he provided,
bidding us cut through the midst of the sea to the island Euboea,
thus to escape from the terrible evil with greatest rapidity.

Whistling behind us, a favoring wind rose up, and the vessels
ran very swiftly along fish-thronged passages, reaching Geraestus
during the night.

Many thighs of bulls to Poseidon we offered,
laid on the fire, after measuring all of the great sea's distance.

It was the fourth day when Diomedes' comrades and faithful companions
moored all their well-balanced ships in the horse-grazing country of Argos.

I continued to Pylos;

the wind never failed from the moment
godhead had first sent it forth to arise and to follow behind me.

Thus I came home, dear child, knowing nothing and bearing no tidings,
which of the Argives had safely returned and which men had been ruined.

All I have heard while I sit in my halls and continue as ruler,
you shall discover, as fitting;

I shall not conceal it before you.

Safe home, people report, came the Myrmidons, furious spearmen,
led by the splendid son who was born from the great-hearted hero Achilles.

Safe also came Philoctetes, the glorious offspring of Poias.

All of his comrades Idomeneus safely conducted to Crete-land,
all who escaped from the war;

not a man did the sea take away from him.

Even though distant, yourselves have heard of the son born of Atreus,
how he came home and how cruelly Aegisthus devised his destruction.

Grim was the price that the man in the end paid fully for murder.

How good it is when a son of the man who has perished survives him!

That son avenged his own father by killing the treacherous murderer,
crooked in counsel Aegisthus, who slaughtered his glorious father.

You too, friend—for I see you are handsome and tall in your stature—
keep yourself brave, so that people unborn may commend you hereafter.”

Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus:

“Nestor, the son of great Neleus, glory renowned of Achaeans,
surely that son brought terrible vengeance, and all the Achaeans
widely shall carry his fame for the knowledge of people hereafter.
Would that the gods might clothe me in similar strength and endow me,
so I could pay back the suitors for all their oppressive transgression,
insolent men who against me devise every reckless aggression!
Yet no such happiness has been spun by the gods for our household,
neither for me nor my father; and now I must bear it regardless.”

Then Gerenian Nestor the horseman replied to him, saying: