“Hear me, Poseidon, the god who encircles and holds the earth firmly;
do not begrudge the fulfillment of these our prayers and intentions.
First upon Nestor and all of his sons now bestow recognition;
afterward grant to the rest of the Pylians gracious repayment,
paying them all in return for this glorious hundredfold offering.
Grant that I and Telemachus sail to our home with the purpose
fully accomplished for which in our swift black ship we have come here.”

Thus did she pray, and herself was fulfilling the prayer she had offered.
Then in the hands of Telemachus placed she the beautiful wine cup;
just as the goddess had prayed, the dear son of Odysseus prayed then.
After the outermost meat had been roasted and taken from firelight,
they shared portions and feasted together upon the magnificent banquet.
Then, when desire for food and for drinking was put from their bodies,
Gerenian Nestor the horseman began to address the assembly:

“Now is a better occasion to question and ask of the strangers
who they may be, since already the feast has delighted their spirits.
Strangers, who are you? From where have you sailed on the waterway pathways?
Come you for business, or wander without an appointed direction,
even as pirates who rove on the face of the waters and hazard
all their own lives while bringing affliction to people of strange lands?”

Then in reply spoke the thoughtful and steadfast young Telemachus,
now full of courage; Athena herself put the strength in his spirit,
so he could ask for a word of his father, so long in his absence,
also that noble renown among mortals might come to himself there:

“Nestor, the son of great Neleus, glory renowned of Achaeans,
you ask from where we have come, and I freely shall give you the answer.
We are from Ithaca under the tree-covered mountain of Neion;
private, and not of the people, is this our affair I am speaking.
I am pursuing the far-ranging fame of my father, to hear some
word of the steadfast and godlike Odysseus, whom people have told me
fought there beside you and brought down ruin on Troyland’s fortress.
All of the other Achaeans, as many as fought with the Trojans,
we have discovered by word, and the bitter death each encountered.
Only his death has the son of great Cronos made past all discovering.
Nobody has the assurance to say where the man may have perished,
whether on land he went down underneath the attack of his foemen,
or in the deep under waves of the sea-goddess Amphitrite.
Therefore I come to your knees in the hope you consent to inform me,
telling the bitter death that he met, whether you were an eyewitness,
or from the speech of another unfortunate wanderer heard it.
More than all others his mother gave birth to the man for affliction.
Do not diminish the story from pity or courtesy toward me;
tell me in full every sight that your own eyes encountered before you.
Hear my entreaty: if ever my excellent father Odysseus
promised a word or an action to you and fulfilled what he promised
there in the country of Troy, where Achaeans endured their afflictions,
call it to mind for me now, and reveal the infallible true word.”

Then Gerenian Nestor the horseman replied to him, saying: