After the killing, Orestes provided the Argives a grave-feast,
one for his hateful mother and one for the coward Aegisthus.

That very day Menelaus, renowned for the war cry, arrived there,
bringing possessions, as many as all of his vessels could carry.

Do not, my friend, be a long time wandering far from your household,
leaving possessions behind and abandoning men in your palace
swollen with violent arrogance, lest they devour all your substance,
sharing your property out and reducing your journey to nothing.

Go to the king Menelaus, I urge and advise you directly:

he has but lately returned from the foreign and faraway peoples,
nations from which no man in the depth of his heart could be hopeful
ever to come back home, once the storm winds had driven him wandering
into a sea so enormous not even the birds in their wing-flight
cross it within a whole year, so vast and so terrible is it.

Go with the ship you possess and the company of your companions,
or, if you rather would travel by land, both a chariot and horses
here you may take, and my sons shall accompany you on the journey
into the shining Lacedaemon, home of the fair-haired Menelaus.

Ask him yourself, so that he may reveal the infallible true word.

No lie shall come from his mouth, for his mind is exceedingly prudent.”

Thus he spoke, while the sun sank down and the twilight descended.
Then the gray-eyed goddess Athena addressed the assembly among them:

“Elder, in all you have said you have spoken with fitting proportion.
Come now, cut out the tongues and prepare the wine in the mixing bowls,
so we may pour to Poseidon and all of the other immortals,
then turn our thought to our sleep, for the hour appointed is on us.
Light has already descended beneath the gloom of the westward;
sitting too long at a feast of the gods is not fitting. Let us go.”

Thus spoke the daughter of Zeus, and the people attended her summons.
Heralds poured water to cleanse all the hands of the people assembled;
young men filled up the wine bowls, crowning the mixture with drinking,
serving to all, first pouring a portion in each cup for godhead.
Into the fire they cast all the tongues; then they stood and made offering.
Then, when they poured and had drunk what the heart of each person desired,
young Telemachus rose with the gray-eyed goddess Athena,
both then intending to go to the hollow-built ship for the nighttime.
Nestor restrained them, however, and caught them with words of insistence:

“Zeus and the rest of the gods who are living forever forbid it,
you should depart from my dwelling and go to your swift-running vessel,
leaving as though from a man altogether without cloak and impoverished,
one who possesses no cloaks or abundance of blankets within his
house, nor has soft bedding for either himself or the guest-friend!
I have an ample abundance of beautiful blankets and cloaks here.
Never while I am alive shall the dear son of this man Odysseus
lie for the night on the deck of a ship; and not afterward either,
while any sons I have fathered remain in the halls of my household,
able to welcome whatever guest-friend may come to my doorway.”

Then the gray-eyed goddess Athena addressed him a second time, saying: