Thus did he pray, and the goddess Athena attended his prayer.
Then Gerenian Nestor the horseman conducted the people,
sons and the husbands of daughters, away to his beautiful household.
Then, when they came to the famous and beautiful house of the ruler,
down in their order they sat on the chairs and the benches surrounding.
Then for their coming the elder prepared in a bowl an abundance
of wine sweet to be drunk, eleven years aged in the storeroom,
opened for them by the stewardess, loosening seals on the vessel.
Some of this wine in the bowl the old man mixed and then to Athena
prayed for a long time, pouring to Zeus' aegis-bearing daughter.
Then, when they poured and had drunk what the heart of each person desired,
all of the others went homeward to sleep, each man to his own house.
There Gerenian Nestor the horseman provided a bedstead
for Telemachus, cherished son of the godlike hero Odysseus,
cord-strung beneath the reverberant porch at the front of the household.
Next to him rested Peisistratus, excellent ash-speared commander,
only unmarried son who remained in the halls of the household.
Nestor himself lay down in the inward room of the high house,
where the respected lady his wife made his bed and his resting.
When Dawn in her earliness rose with her rose-colored fingers,
then from his bed rose up Gerenian Nestor the horseman.
Out of the house he proceeded and sat on the smooth-polished stone seats
standing in front of the lofty and strongly constructed house door,
white-colored stones, all shining as though they were polished with oil there.
There in the days long ago Neleus sat, as a counselor godlike;
now he was gone to the house of great Hades, subdued by his death-doom.
There in his turn sat Gerenian Nestor, the guard of Achaeans,
holding the scepter. His sons came around him and gathered together,
leaving their rooms: Echephron, Stratius standing beside him,
Perseus, Aretus, and godlike Thrasymedes the spearman;
sixth of them came Peisistratus, hero, and joined the assembly.
Bringing the godlike young Telemachus, they seated him with them.
Then Gerenian Nestor the horseman began to address the assembly:

“Quickly, beloved sons, you must now bring my wish to fulfillment,
so I may render Athena propitious before all immortals,
she who appeared to me openly there at the god’s splendid banquet.
Come, let one go to the plain for a heifer as fast as he can go,
letting the herdsman who watches the cattle conduct her behind him;
one must descend to the black-colored ship of the great-hearted young man,
bringing the whole of his company here and abandoning two men;
one tell Laerces the goldsmith to come to the place of our feasting,
so he may pour out the gold all around on the horns of the heifer.
All of the others remain here together, and tell the slave women
there in the house to prepare through the glorious halls for the banquet,
bringing us seats and the firewood around them and radiant water.”