“Dear child, since you remind me of grief and the hardships we suffered
there in that country, we ungovernable sons of Achaeans—
all we endured as we roved in the ships on the mist-covered sea-way,
looking for plunder wherever Achilles conducted our war band,
all we endured while we fought at the great city ruled by King Priam—
there through the years the best of our people were slaughtered in battle.

There lies Ajax, beloved of Ares, and there lies Achilles;

there Patroclus, whose counsel was equal to counsel of godhead;

there my own well-beloved son, altogether courageous and blameless,
swift-footed Antilochus, excellent runner and excellent spearman.

Many the other afflictions we suffered besides them;

but what man,
born among mortals, could tell and enumerate all of the story?

No, not if you remained for five full years or for six years,
asking me all of the evils the excellent Argives encountered;

sooner, exhausted, you then would return to the land of your fathers.

Nine years long we were stitching destruction around them and plotting
every conceivable cunning, and Cronos' son scarcely ended it.

No man there would openly set his intelligence against that man's counsel,
no man who wished to succeed, for greatly surpassed them Odysseus
in every form of deception—your father, if you are truly
born from his blood.

I am seized with astonishment, looking upon you.

Certainly all of your speeches resemble the speeches he offered;

no one would think that a younger man could resemble him speaking.

All of the time we remained there, the noble Odysseus and I would
never be found in assembly or council opposing each other.

One heart between us, with wisdom of mind and considerate judgment,
guided the Argives in counsel, devising the best way before them.

Then, when at last we had ravaged the steep-walled city of Priam,
entered the ships, and a god had dispersed the Achaeans asunder,
Zeus in the depth of his heart designed a calamitous homeward
road for the Argives, for not every man had intelligence in him,
nor was he just.

Many therefore encountered a destiny evil,
all through the ruinous wrath of the mighty god's gray-eyed daughter.

She set a quarrel between the two sons who were born of great Atreus.

Both of them called the Achaeans at once to a general meeting,
rashly and out of due order, when Helios sank in the westward,
while all the sons of Achaea arrived there made heavy by wine-drink.

Both of the kings then explained why the host had been called to assembly.

There Menelaus encouraged the whole of the gathered Achaeans
all to remember the journey for home on the broad back of ocean.

Agamemnon was not at all pleased by the words of his brother;

he wished to hold the host and to make the appropriate offerings,
holy hecatombs, hoping to soften Athena's harsh anger—
fool that he was, for he knew not the goddess would not be persuaded.

Minds of the gods everlasting are not turned around in a moment.

So the two stood and exchanged bitter words with each other before us;

then the Achaeans in strong-plated greaves rose up in a clamor,
making a terrible din, while two separate counsels divided.

All through the night we reposed on our anger and brooded on harshness
aimed at each other, while Zeus was preparing a stroke of destruction.

Then with the dawning, one half of us hauled down the ships to the bright sea,
loading possessions aboard and the women in low-girded garments.

Half of the army remained and was held from the journey, continuing
there with the son born of Atreus, Agamemnon, shepherd of peoples.

Half of us entered the ships and departed;

and rapidly ran they,
since underneath them a god smoothed over the monster-filled sea-way.