It is appropriate also for you, when among the first rulers
sitting in council, to have clean clothing around your body.

Five well-beloved sons have been born to you here in the palace,
two of them married, while three are flourishing men without marriage;

always they wish to have clothes newly washed and clean on their bodies
when they go out to the dance, and all these concerns fill my thinking.”
Thus did she speak, for she shrank from naming her marriage in fullness
there to her well-loved father;

but he understood it and answered:

“Child, I do not begrudge you the mules or whatever you ask for.

Go, and the slaves shall make a fine wagon prepared for the journey,
one with a body raised high, good wheels, and a rack fitted over.”
Thus did he speak, and he called to the slaves, who at once gave obedience.

Out in the courtyard they made the smoothly running mule wagon,
bringing the mules underneath and securing them under the harness.

Then from her chamber the maiden carried the beautiful garments,
placing them all in the wagon’s elaborately polished body.

Mother prepared and filled up a chest with the heartening food there,
every variety, laying delicacies and pouring wine into
goatskin container;

and then the young maiden climbed into the wagon.

Mother provided the soft olive oil in a vessel of gold-work,
so Nausicaa and all of her serving women might use it after bathing.

Then she took hold of the whip and the reins that were glossy and shining,
striking the mules into running;

and clattering loudly their hoofbeats
sounded, and tirelessly onward they strained, bearing clothes and the maiden,
not by herself, for beside her the serving women were walking.

Then, when they came to the beautiful stream of the flowing river,
there where the washing pools never failed and abundance of clear flow
welled from beneath and ran over to cleanse even garments most dirty,
there from the wagon they loosened the mules and removed all the harness,
driving them onward beside the eddying course of the river,
there to graze on the honey-sweet water grass;

then from the wagon
armful by armful the garments they carried and laid in dark water,
stamping them briskly in washing trenches and racing each other.

Then, when they thoroughly washed every garment and cleansed it of all dirt,
all they spread out in order along the beach pebbles of sea-way,
there where the waves coming onto the shore washed cleanest the shingle.

Then, when they bathed and had richly anointed their bodies with olive oil,
there by the side of the river they ate their meal and were waiting
while in the radiance sent by the sun all the garments were drying.

Then, when desire for food and for eating was put from their bodies,
they cast off the veils from their heads and played with a ball there,
while white-armed Nausicaa led all the women in singing.

Just as the arrow-showering Artemis goes through the mountains,
either along high Taygetus or on Erymanthus,
taking delight in the boars and the rapidly running red deer there;

nymphs of the wilds, all daughters of Zeus who possesses the aegis,
play there beside her, and Leto is gladdened at heart as she watches.

High over all of them Artemis carries her head and her forehead,
easily known, although every one of the nymphs is a beauty;

so did the unmarried maiden surpass all the women who served her.

Yet when at last she intended to fold all the beautiful garments,
harness the mules once again, and return to the city and household,
then the gray-eyed goddess Athena devised a new counsel,
how great Odysseus might wake and behold the beautiful maiden,
and she might lead him at last to the city that held the Phaeacians.

Then at a serving woman the princess cast the round ball there;