Better if she has gone elsewhere herself and discovered a husband,
since she dishonors the people who live in Phaeacian country,
though she has many excellent men among those who would court her.’
So they shall speak, and the gossip would make a reproach against me.

Even myself I would blame any maiden who acted in this way,
who, with her dear father and mother alive and unwilling,
mingled with men before she had come to the day of her marriage.

Stranger, give close attention to what I am telling you, so you
soon may secure from my father an escort and passage for homecoming.

Close to the roadway you shall find a beautiful grove of Athena,
poplars around it, a spring welling up, and a meadow surrounding.

There is my father's estate and his flourishing orchard around it,
lying as far from the city as voice of a shouting man carries.

Sit there and wait for a while, until we who travel before you
enter the city ourselves and arrive at my father's palace.

When you believe we have come to the palace and entered it fully,
then make your way to the city and ask the Phaeacian people
where is the palace belonging to great-hearted lord Alcinous.

Easily it may be known;

even an infant could lead you
there by the hand, since none of the houses Phaeacians inhabit
bear any likeness to that noble house of the hero Alcinous.

Then, when the palace and courtyard have covered you there from all eyesight,
hurry across the great hall until you arrive at my mother.

Close to the fire she sits in the light and the warmth of the hearth-flame,
spinning a yarn of the color of sea-purple, wondrous to gaze on,
leaning against a great pillar, her serving women behind her.

Close to her there is my father's chair, reclining against hers;

there he sits drinking his wine every day like an immortal.

Pass by my father and cast both your arms round the knees of my mother,
if you desire to behold the day of your homecoming quickly,
filled with delight, even though your homeland is lying far distant.

If in her heart she determines to think with a kindness about you,
there is a hope that your friends and your family still shall be seen there,
entering into your well-built house in the land of your fathers.”
Thus having spoken, she struck with the shining whip at the mule-team;

rapidly onward they left the stream of the river behind them.

Smoothly they trotted along, and they carried their legs well beneath them;

carefully she kept driving, so all of the walkers might follow,
serving attendants and lord Odysseus, and wisely she lashed them.

Then the sun entered the west, and they came to the glorious grove-land,
sacred to Pallas Athena.

There noble Odysseus sat down;

straightway then he prayed to the daughter of Zeus in the open:

“Hear me now, child of Zeus who possesses the aegis, Unwearied.

Hear me now at the last, since you did not hear me before this
when I was broken, when the lord of the earth-shaking waters broke me.

Grant me a welcome of pity and friendship among the Phaeacians.”
Thus did he speak in his prayer, and Pallas Athena had heard him.

Yet she did not appear to him face to face in the grove there;

awe of her father's own brother restrained her, who furiously raged on
against Odysseus the godlike, until he arrived in his homeland.