Then, when he washed himself thoroughly, rubbing with oil all his body,
also had dressed in the clothes the unmarried maiden had given,
then did Athena, the daughter of Zeus, make him taller in stature,
broader to look at as well;

and she caused from the head of Odysseus
locks to flow downward in curls like flowers of purple hyacinth.

Just as a skillful man pours gold around silver, a craftsman
taught by Hephaestus and Pallas Athena in every fine artwork,
artworks with manifold grace;

so she poured her grace round Odysseus,
over his head and his shoulders.

He moved off apart from the women,
sitting upon the sea-shingle, radiant with beauty and favor.

There the young maiden gazed at him long, and she spoke to her fair-haired
serving attendants, addressing the women who waited around her:

“Listen to me, white-armed serving women, to what I shall tell you.

Not without all of the gods who inhabit the heights of Olympus
willing it has this man come here among the Phaeacian people.

Previously, he appeared to my eyes an unworthy companion;

now he resembles the gods who inhabit the expanses of heaven.

If such a man might only be called my husband and live here,
and if it pleased him as well to remain in our country forever!

Come, my attendants, provide this stranger with eating and drinking.”
Thus did she speak, and they listened to her and readily answered,
setting the food and the drink in front of the lord Odysseus.

Then great-hearted and much-enduring lordly Odysseus
ravenously drank and ate, since long he had gone without eating.

Meanwhile white-armed Nausicaa devised something different:

folding the clothes, in the beautiful wagon she placed them in order,
yoked the strong-hoofed mules underneath it, and mounted the wagon.

Then she encouraged Odysseus and spoke, addressing him plainly:

“Rise now, stranger, and go to the city, so I may direct you
there to the house of my prudent father, where I can assure you
you shall become acquainted with all the Phaeacians' finest.

Only do this, since I do not believe you are lacking in judgment.

While we continue among the fields and the works of the people,
follow the mules and the wagon on foot with the serving women,
walking there briskly;

I shall be traveling onward before you.

Yet when we come to the city, encircled by high walls around it,
there on each side of the city a beautiful harbor is lying;

narrow the entrance is found, while the curved ships are drawn from the water
up by the road, for every man has a place for his vessel.

There is the meeting place at the beautiful shrine of Poseidon,
tightly constructed of quarried stones set firmly and deeply.

There they attend to the black ships' tackle and all of the rigging,
cables and sails, and they plane all the oars until smooth for the rowing.

No care at all for the bows and the quivers have these Phaeacians,
only for masts and the oars of the ships and the balanced vessels,
crossing in these with delight over all of the gray salt water.

I must avoid their malicious talk, so that none may revile me
later behind me, for insolent men are abundant among them.

One of the baser men, meeting us there, might speak in this manner:

‘Who is this stranger who follows Nausicaa, handsome and mighty?

Where did she find him?

Surely she means him to be her husband.

Perhaps she attended a castaway man from a far-sailing vessel,
someone who came from an alien land, since no people are near us;

or a divinity, long entreated, descended to meet her,
coming from heaven in answer, and he shall possess her forever.