missing the woman, she cast it instead in a deep-whirling eddy,
making them all cry aloud;

and illustrious lordly Odysseus
wakened, and sitting upright he pondered within mind and spirit:

“Ah me, now to the country of what mortal people have I come?

Are they insolent people and savage and strangers to justice,
or are they friendly to strangers, with god-fearing hearts in their bodies?

Surely the feminine cry of young maidens has sounded around me,
nymphs who inhabit the steep mountain peaks and the springs of the rivers,
also the grass-covered meadows that lie at the side of the waters.

Or may it be I am close to articulate human beings?

Come then, I shall make trial myself and discover the answer.”
Thus having spoken, from under the thicket illustrious Odysseus
crept, and he broke with a powerful hand from the densely grown woodland
one leafy branch, so he might cover his nakedness like a man should.

Then he advanced like a mountain-bred lion assured of his power,
moving beneath the assault of the rain and the wind, while his two eyes
burn in his head, and he comes against cattle or sheep in the pasture,
even pursuing the wild deer;

hunger within him commands him
even to enter a closely built fold and attack all the livestock.

So did Odysseus intend to approach the beautiful-haired girls,
naked although he was, since a terrible need had befallen him.

Dreadful he seemed to the girls, disfigured by brine of the salt sea,
scattering each to a different place on the jutting shore beaches.

Only the daughter of great Alcinous stayed, for Athena
planted boldness within her heart and took fear from her body.

Standing, she faced him and held her ground;

but lordly Odysseus
pondered whether to clasp at the knees of the beautiful maiden,
or, while standing apart, to address her with honey-sweet language,
begging that she show the city and also provide him with clothing.

Then, as he pondered, this seemed in his heart to be better and wiser:

standing apart to address her with honey-sweet words of entreaty,
lest the young maiden be angered at heart if he clasped at her knees there.

Straightway then he addressed her with words both honeyed and cunning:

“Queen, I am here at your knees:

are you goddess, or are you a mortal?

If you are one of the gods who possess the expanses of heaven,
Artemis, daughter of Zeus, is the goddess to whom I would match you,
nearest in stature and loveliness, nearest in bodily bearing.

But if you are one of the mortals who live on the earth here,
three times blessed are both your father and reverend mother,
three times blessed are your brothers;

surely the hearts in their bodies
always are warmed with delight and with pleasure because of your beauty,
watching a sapling like you step gracefully into the dancing.

Yet above all in his heart is that man most greatly exalted
who with his bridal gifts outweighs rivals and leads you homeward.

Never before have my eyes seen anyone equal in beauty,
neither a woman nor man;

astonishment takes me in gazing.

Once on the island of Delos, beside the altar of Phoebus,
I saw a young palm tree rising to heaven with beautiful branches;

I had come there as well, and a numerous army attended,
following me on a journey from which many sorrows would reach me.

Just as in seeing the palm I marveled a long time in spirit,
since no such sapling had ever arisen before from the soil there,
so, young woman, I marvel at you and am filled with amazement,
greatly afraid to embrace your knees, though sorrow is on me.

Only yesterday morning, the twentieth day, I escaped from
out of the wine-dark sea;

all the time until then I was carried
onward by waves and by violent storms from the island Ogygia.