So there the steadfast and noble Odysseus rested in slumber,
conquered by sleep and exhaustion.

Meanwhile the goddess Athena
went to the land and the city that held the Phaeacian people,
those who in earlier days made their dwelling in spacious Hypereia,
close to the Cyclopes, arrogant men who continually raided,
since the Cyclopes surpassed the Phaeacians greatly in power.

Godlike Nausithous uprooted and led them away from that country,
settling them in Scheria, far from the bread-eating peoples.

Round the city he drove a wall and erected the houses,
built the temples of gods, and divided the plowlands among them.

Long since, broken by destiny, he had gone to the household of Hades;

now Alcinous governed with counsels inspired by godhead.

Into his house came the gray-eyed goddess Athena,
there to devise the return of the great-hearted lord Odysseus.

Into a richly constructed chamber she entered, where one young
maiden was sleeping, resembling immortals in body and beauty,
Nausicaa, the daughter of great-hearted lord Alcinous.

Two slave women were sleeping beside her, with beauty from Graces,
each at a post of the doorway, and shining doors closed before them.

Like a breath of the wind she swept to the bed of the maiden,
stood at the head of her bed and addressed her and gave her instruction,
taking the bodily form of the daughter of Dymas, the famous
shipman, a girl of her age and exceedingly dear to her spirit.

Taking her likeness, the gray-eyed goddess Athena addressed her:

“Nausicaa, how did your mother give birth to a child so unmindful?

All your resplendent clothing is lying uncared for around you,
though your own marriage is near, when you need beautiful garments,
both for yourself and to give to the people who lead the procession.

From such possessions an excellent reputation arises
there among people, and both your father and honored mother are gladdened.

Come, let us go to the washing pools at the showing of daylight;

I shall accompany you and shall labor beside you, so sooner
you are prepared, for truly you shall not be long without marriage.

Already all of the best men throughout Phaeacian country
court you, and all of them spring from the same proud lineage as you.

Come then, urge your renowned father before early dawn to provide you
mules and a wagon, so all of the sashes and robes may be carried,
also the shining blankets and covers that need to be washed there.

This is more fitting for you as well than to travel there walking,
since from the city the washing pools lie at a very great distance.”
Thus having spoken, the gray-eyed goddess Athena departed
up to Olympus, where people declare that the seat of immortals
stands unshaken forever by winds and is never made wet by
rain;

neither snow draws near, but the clear upper sky without cloud there
stretches around, and a radiant whiteness continually shines there.

There all the blessed gods take their joy every day of existence.

There went the gray-eyed goddess when she had advised the young maiden.

Straightway Dawn on her beautiful throne came upward and wakened
Nausicaa of the beautiful robe, who marveled at dreamland,
passing throughout the house to inform both her father and mother.

both her beloved father and mother she found in the household.

Mother was sitting beside the fire among serving women,
spinning the yarn of a violet sea hue;

her father she encountered
there at the door, on his way to the famous rulers assembled
there in the council where all of the lordly Phaeacians called him.

Standing beside her beloved father, she spoke and addressed him:

“Dearest Papa, will you now make ready a wagon to carry,
one raised high upon excellent wheels, so the beautiful garments
lying around me in dirt I may take to the river for washing?