Now some divinity cast me ashore, perhaps to be troubled
even in this place;

I think that my evil shall not yet be ended,
since before that the gods shall fulfill many more of my troubles.

Queen, take pity upon me;

to you I have first come directly,
after my terrible labors, and none of the others I know here,
none of the people whose city and country surround me.

Now show me
where is the town, and provide me a rag to be thrown round my body,
if in arriving you brought any cloth that had wrapped up the linen.

May all the gods give you everything dear to your heart and your longing,
husband and household, and may they bestow good harmony with them;

nothing is stronger and finer than when, being like-minded together,
husband and wife in the household live;

many pains to their haters,
joys to their friends they provide, but they know their happiness best.”
Then in her turn the white-armed Nausicaa answered Odysseus:

“Stranger, since you do not seem to be base or devoid of good judgment,
Zeus who is lord of Olympus himself gives happiness freely,
both to the noble and base, to each as his purpose determines.

He must have given you this;

you must bear it, however it happens.

Now, since you come to our country and city, you shall not be lacking
either in clothing or anything else that is due to the hard-worn
suppliant stranger who happens to meet us.

I shall show the city,
also shall tell you the name by which all the people are called here.

These are Phaeacians who hold this city and country around it;

I am the daughter of great-hearted lord Alcinous,
upon whom all Phaeacian power and strength are depending.”
Thus did she speak and call out to the beautiful-haired serving women:

“Stop where you are, my attendants!

Why do you flee from a mortal?

Surely you do not imagine that this is some enemy warrior?

No mortal man who is living exists, nor ever shall be born,
who could arrive in the land of Phaeacian men bringing warfare;

very dear to the deathless gods are the people who live here.

Far from all others we dwell in the greatly resounding salt water,
out at the edge of the world, and no mortal people come near us.

This man instead is a miserable wanderer, straying among us,
whom we must now tend well, since strangers and beggars are all from
Zeus, and even a small gift given in welcome is precious.

Come, my attendants, provide this stranger with eating and drinking;

bathe him as well in the river wherever the wind cannot reach him.”
Thus did she speak, and they halted and called to each other in answer,
leading Odysseus away to a place with a shelter, according
to the command of Nausicaa, daughter of great Alcinous.

There they laid down a tunic and cloak to provide him with clothing;

also they gave him the smooth olive oil in the golden container,
urging the stranger to bathe in the flowing streams of the river.

Then great Odysseus spoke to the beautiful serving women:

“Stand at a distance, attendants, while I by myself wash the sea-brine
there from my shoulders, and rub olive oil all around me;

for truly
oil has been far from my skin for a terribly long span of time now.

Yet in your presence I shall not bathe, since shame would possess me,
standing there naked among young women with beautiful tresses.”
Thus did he speak, and they moved off and told the young maiden his answer.

Then in the river illustrious lordly Odysseus bathed him,
washing the brine from his back and his broad strong shoulders, the sea-crust
rubbed from his head that had come from the barren expanses of ocean.